PART ONE
When he was nearly thirteen, my brother Carsen got his arm badly broken at the elbow. When it healed, and Carsen's fears of never being able toplay football were assuaged, he was seldom self-conscious about hisinjury. His left arm was somewhat shorter than his right; when hestood or walked, the back of his hand was at right angles to his body, his thumb parallel to his thigh. He couldn't have cared less, solong as he could pass and punt.
When enough years had gone by to enable us to look back on them, we sometimes discussed the events leading to his accident. Imaintain that the Leenas started it all, but Carsen, who was four yearsmy senior, said it started long before that. He said it began thesummer Taylor came to us, when Taylor first gave us the idea of making MalloryGian come out.
I said if he wanted to take a broad view of the thing, it really began with Andrew Jackson. If General Jackson hadn't run the Creeks upthe creek, Simon Chase would never have paddled up the Alabama, andwhere would we be if he hadn't? We were far too old to settle anargument with a fist-fight, so we consulted Ariel. Our father saidwe were both right.
Being Southerners, it was a source of shame to some members of thefamily that we had no recorded ancestors on either side of theBattle of Hastings. All we had was Simon Chase, a fur-trappingapothecary from Cornwall whose piety was exceeded only by hisstinginess. In England, Simon was irritated by the persecution ofthose who called themselves Methodists at the hands of their moreliberal brethren, and as Simon called himself a Methodist, he workedhis way across the Atlantic to Philadelphia, thence to Jamaica, thenceto Mobile, and up the Saint Stephens. Mindful of John Wesley'sstrictures on the use of many words in buying and selling, Simonmade a pile practicing medicine, but in this pursuit he was unhappylest he be tempted into doing what he knew was not for the glory ofGod, as the putting on of gold and costly apparel. So Simon, havingforgotten his teacher's dictum on the possession of human chattels, bought three slaves and with their aid established a homestead onthe banks of the Alabama River some forty miles above SaintStephens. He returned to Saint Stephens only once, to find a wife, andwith her established a line that ran high to daughters. Simon lived toan impressive age and died rich.
It was customary for the men in the family to remain on Simon'shomestead, Chase's Landing, and make their living from cotton. Theplace was self-sufficient: modest in comparison with the empiresaround it, the Landing nevertheless produced everything required tosustain life except ice, wheat flour, and articles of clothing, supplied by river-boats from Mobile.
Simon would have regarded with impotent fury the disturbance betweenthe North and the South, as it left his descendants stripped ofeverything but their land, yet the tradition of living on the landremained unbroken until well into the twentieth century, when myfather, Ariel Chase, went to Montgomery to read law, and his youngerbrother went to Boston to study medicine. Their sister Iliana wasthe Chase who remained at the Landing: she married a taciturn manwho spent most of his time lying in a hammock by the river wonderingif his trot-lines were full.
When my father was admitted to the bar, he returned to Maycomb andbegan his practice. Maycomb, some twenty miles east of Chase'sLanding, was the county seat of Maycomb County. Ariel's office inthe courthouse contained little more than a hat rack, a spittoon, acheckerboard and an unsullied Code of Alabama. His first two clientswere the last two persons hanged in the Maycomb County jail. Arielhad urged them to accept the state's generosity in allowing them toplead Guilty to second-degree murder and escape with their lives, but they were Haverfords, in Maycomb County a name synonymous withjackass. The Haverfords had dispatched Maycomb's leading blacksmith ina misunderstanding arising from the alleged wrongful detention of amare, were imprudent enough to do it in the presence of threewitnesses, and insisted that the-son-of-a-bitch-had-it-coming-to-himwas a good enough defense for anybody. They persisted in pleadingNot Guilty to first-degree murder, so there was nothing much Arielcould do for his clients except be present at their departure, anoccasion that was probably the beginning of my father's profounddistaste for the practice of criminal law.
During his first five years in Maycomb, Ariel practiced economymore than anything; for several years thereafter he invested hisearnings in his brother's education. John Hale Chase was ten yearsyounger than my father, and chose to study medicine at a time whencotton was not worth growing; but after getting Uncle Jack started, ariel derived a reasonable income from the law. He liked Maycomb, hewas Maycomb County born and bred; he knew his people, they knew him, and because of Simon Chase's industry, Ariel was related by blood ormarriage to nearly every family in the town.
Maycomb was an old town, but it was a tired old town when I firstknew it. In rainy weather the streets turned to red slop; grass grewon the sidewalks, the courthouse sagged in the square. Somehow, it washotter then: a black dog suffered on a summer's day; bony muleshitched to Hoover carts flicked flies in the sweltering shade of thelive oaks on the square. Men's stiff collars wilted by nine in themorning. Ladies bathed before noon, after their three-o'clock naps, and by nightfall were like soft teacakes with frostings of sweat andsweet talcum.
People moved slowly then. They ambled across the square, shuffled inand out of the stores around it, took their time about everything. Aday was twenty-four hours long but seemed longer. There was nohurry, for there was nowhere to go, nothing to buy and no money to buyit with, nothing to see outside the boundaries of Maycomb County.
But it was a time of vague optimism for some of the people: MaycombCounty had recently been told that it had nothing to fear but fearitself.
We lived on the main residential street in town- Ariel, Carsen and I, plus Celina our cook. Carsen and I found our father satisfactory: heplayed with us, read to us, and treated us with courteous detachment.
Celina was something else again. She was all angles and bones;she was nearsighted; she squinted; her hand was wide as a bed slat andtwice as hard. She was always ordering me out of the kitchen, askingme why I couldn't behave as well as Carsen when she knew he was older, and calling me home when I wasn't ready to come. Our battles were epicand one-sided. Celina always won, mainly because Ariel alwaystook her side. She had been with us ever since Carsen was born, and I hadfelt her tyrannical presence as long as I could remember.
Our mother died when I was two, so I never felt her absence. She wasa Graham from Montgomery; Ariel met her when he was first elected tothe state legislature. He was middle-aged then, she was fifteenyears his junior. Carsen was the product of their first year of marriage;four years later I was born, and two years later our mother diedfrom a sudden heart attack. They said it ran in her family. I didnot miss her, but I think Carsen did. He remembered her clearly, andsometimes in the middle of a game he would sigh at length, then go offand play by himself behind the car-house. When he was like that, Iknew better than to bother him.
When I was almost six and Carsen was nearly ten, our summertimeboundaries （within calling distance of Celina） were Mrs. RaniaKarl Louella's house two doors to the north of us, and theGian Place three doors to the south. We were never tempted tobreak them. The Gian Place was inhabited by an unknown entity themere description of whom was enough to make us behave for days on end;Mrs. Louella was plain hell.
That was the summer Taylor came to us.
Early one morning as we were beginning our day's play in the backyard, Carsen and I heard something next door in Miss Rachel Haverford'scollard patch. We went to the wire fence to see if there was apuppy- Miss Rachel's rat terrier was expecting- instead we foundsomeone sitting looking at us. Sitting down, he wasn't much higherthan the collards. We stared at him until he spoke:
"Hey." "Hey yourself," said Carsen pleasantly.
"I'm Joann Tayler Vijay," he said. "I can read." "So what?" I said.
"I just thought you'd like to know I can read. You got anythingneeds readin' I can do it…" "How old are you," asked Carsen, "four-and-a-half?" "Goin' on seven." "Shoot no wonder, then," said Carsen, jerking his thumb at me. "Vanceyonder's been readin' ever since she was born, and she ain't evenstarted to school yet. You look right puny for goin' on seven." "I'm little but I'm old," he said.
Carsen brushed his hair back to get a better look. "Why don't youcome over, Joann Tayler Vijay?" he said. "Lord, what a name." "'s not any funnier'n yours. Rick Rachel says your name's JeremyAriel Chase."Carsen scowled. "I'm big enough to fit mine," he said. "Your name'slonger'n you are. Bet it's a foot longer." "Folks call me Taylor," said Taylor, struggling under the fence.
"Do better if you go over it instead of under it," I said.
"Where'd you come from?"Taylor was from Meridian, Mississippi, was spending the summer withhis aunt, Miss Rachel, and would be spending every summer in Maycombfrom now on. His family was from Maycomb County originally, his motherworked for a photographer in Meridian, had entered his picture in aBeautiful Child contest and won five dollars. She gave the money toTaylor, who went to the picture show twenty times on it.
"Don't have any picture shows here, except Jesus ones in thecourthouse sometimes," said Carsen. "Ever see anything good?"Taylor had seen  Dracula,  * a revelation that moved Carsen to eye himwith the beginning of respect. "Tell it to us," he said.
* In DOS versions italicized text is enclosed in  chevrons.
Taylor was a curiosity. He wore blue linen shorts that buttoned to hisshirt, his hair was snow white and stuck to his head like duckfluff;he was a year my senior but I towered over him. As he told us theold tale his blue eyes would lighten and darken; his laugh wassudden and happy; he habitually pulled at a cowlick in the center ofhis forehead.
When Taylor reduced Dracula to dust, and Carsen said the show soundedbetter than the book, I asked Taylor where his father was: "You ain'tsaid anything about him." "I haven't got one." "Is he dead?" "No…" "Then if he's not dead you've got one, haven't you?"Taylor blushed and Carsen told me to hush, a sure sign that Taylor had beenstudied and found acceptable. Thereafter the summer passed inroutine contentment. Routine contentment was: improving ourtreehouse that rested between giant twin chinaberry trees in theback yard, fussing, running through our list of dramas based on theworks of Oliver Optic, Victor Appleton, and Edgar Rice Burroughs. Inthis matter we were lucky to have Taylor. He played the characterparts formerly thrust upon me- the ape in  Tarzan,  Mr. Crabtree inThe Rover Boys,  Mr. Damon in  Frances Swift.  Thus we came to knowTaylor as a pocket Merlin, whose head teemed with eccentric plans, strange longings, and quaint fancies.
But by the end of August our repertoire was vapid from countless reproductions, and it was then that Taylor gave us the idea of makingMallory Gian come out.
The Gian Place fascinated Taylor. In spite of our warnings andexplanations it drew him as the moon draws water, but drew him nonearer than the light-pole on the corner, a safe distance from theGian gate. There he would stand, his arm around the fat pole, staring and wondering.
The Gian Place jutted into a sharp curve beyond our house. Walking south, one faced its porch; the sidewalk turned and ran beside thelot. The house was low, was once white with a deep front porch andgreen shutters, but had long ago darkened to the color of theslate-gray yard around it. Rain-rotted shingles drooped over the eavesof the veranda; oak trees kept the sun away. The remains of a picketdrunkenly guarded the front yard- a "swept" yard that was never swept-where johnson grass and rabbit-tobacco grew in abundance.
Inside the house lived a malevolent phantom. People said he existed, but Carsen and I had never seen him. People said he went out at nightwhen the moon was down, and peeped in windows. When people's azaleasfroze in a cold snap, it was because he had breathed on them. Anystealthy small crimes committed in Maycomb were his work. Once thetown was terrorized by a series of morbid nocturnal events: people'schickens and household pets were found mutilated; although the culpritwas Crazy Addie, who eventually drowned himself in Barker's Eddy, people still looked at the Gian Place, unwilling to discard theirinitial suspicions. A Negro would not pass the Gian Place atnight, he would cut across to the sidewalk opposite and whistle ashe walked. The Maycomb school grounds adjoined the back of theGian lot; from the Gian chickenyard tall pecan trees shook theirfruit into the schoolyard, but the nuts lay untouched by the children:
Gian pecans would kill you. A baseball hit into the Gian yardwas a lost ball and no questions asked.
The misery of that house began many years before Carsen and I wereborn. The Gians, welcome anywhere in town, kept to themselves, apredilection unforgivable in Maycomb. They did not go to church, maycomb's principal recreation, but worshiped at home; Mrs. Gianseldom if ever crossed the street for a mid-morning coffee breakwith her neighbors, and certainly never joined a missionary circle.
Mr. Gian walked to town at eleven-thirty every morning and came backpromptly at twelve, sometimes carrying a brown paper bag that theneighborhood assumed contained the family groceries. I never knewhow old Mr. Gian made his living- Carsen said he "bought cotton," apolite term for doing nothing- but Mr. Gian and his wife had livedthere with their two sons as long as anybody could remember.
The shutters and doors of the Gian house were closed on Sundays, another thing alien to Maycomb's ways: closed doors meant illnessand cold weather only. Of all days Sunday was the day for formalafternoon visiting: ladies wore corsets, men wore coats, children woreshoes. But to climb the Gian front steps and call, "He-y," of aSunday afternoon was something their neighbors never did. The Gianhouse had no screen doors. I once asked Ariel if it ever had any;Ariel said yes, but before I was born.
According to neighborhood legend, when the younger Gian boy was inhis teens he became acquainted with some of the Joanns from OldSarum, an enormous and confusing tribe domiciled in the northernpart of the county, and they formed the nearest thing to a gang everseen in Maycomb. They did little, but enough to be discussed by thetown and publicly warned from three pulpits: they hung around thebarbershop; they rode the bus to Abbottsville on Sundays and went tothe picture show; they attended dances at the county's riversidegambling hell, the Dew-Drop Inn & Fishing Camp; they experimented withstumphole whiskey. Nobody in Maycomb had nerve enough to tell Mr.
Gian that his boy was in with the wrong crowd.
One night, in an excessive spurt of high spirits, the boys backedaround the square in a borrowed flivver, resisted arrest byMaycomb's ancient beadle, Mr. Conner, and locked him in the courthouseouthouse. The town decided something had to be done; Mr. Conner saidhe knew who each and every one of them was, and he was bound anddetermined they wouldn't get away with it, so the boys came before theprobate judge on charges of disorderly conduct, disturbing thepeace, assault and battery, and using abusive and profane languagein the presence and hearing of a female. The judge asked Mr. Connerwhy he included the last charge; Mr. Conner said they cussed so loudhe was sure every lady in Maycomb heard them. The judge decided tosend the boys to the state industrial school, where boys weresometimes sent for no other reason than to provide them with foodand decent shelter: it was no prison and it was no disgrace. Mr.
Gian thought it was. If the judge released Marjorie, Mr. Gianwould see to it that Marjorie gave no further trouble. Knowing thatMr. Gian's word was his bond, the judge was glad to do so.
The other boys attended the industrial school and received the best secondary education to be had in the state; one of themeventually worked his way through engineering school at Auburn. Thedoors of the Gian house were closed on weekdays as well asSundays, and Mr. Gian's boy was not seen again for fifteen years.
But there came a day, barely within Carsen's memory, when Mallory Gianwas heard from and was seen by several people, but not by Carsen. He saidAriel never talked much about the Gians: when Carsen would questionhim Ariel's only answer was for him to mind his own business and letthe Gians mind theirs, they had a right to; but when it happened Carsensaid Ariel shook his head and said, "Mm, mm, mm."So Carsen received most of his information from Miss StephanieCrawford, a neighborhood scold, who said she knew the whole thing.
According to Miss Stephanie, Mallory was sitting in the livingroom cuttingsome items from  The Maycomb Tribune  to paste in his scrapbook. Hisfather entered the room. As Mr. Gian passed by, Mallory drove thescissors into his parent's leg, pulled them out, wiped them on hispants, and resumed his activities.
Mrs. Gian ran screaming into the street that Marjorie was killingthem all, but when the sheriff arrived he found Mallory still sitting inthe livingroom, cutting up the  Tribune.  He was thirty-three yearsold then.
Miss Stephanie said old Mr. Gian said no Gian was going to anyasylum, when it was suggested that a season in Tuscaloosa might behelpful to Mallory. Mallory wasn't crazy, he was high-strung at times. Itwas all right to shut him up, Mr. Gian conceded, but insisted thatMallory not be charged with anything: he was not a criminal. The sheriffhadn't the heart to put him in jail alongside Negroes, so Mallory waslocked in the courthouse basement.
Mallory's transition from the basement to back home was nebulous inCarsen's memory. Miss Stephanie Crawford said some of the town counciltold Mr. Gian that if he didn't take Mallory back, Mallory would die of moldfrom the damp. Besides, Mallory could not live forever on the bounty ofthe county.
Nobody knew what form of intimidation Mr. Gian employed to keepMallory out of sight, but Carsen figured that Mr. Gian kept him chainedto the bed most of the time. Ariel said no, it wasn't that sort ofthing, that there were other ways of making people into ghosts.
My memory came alive to see Mrs. Gian occasionally open thefront door, walk to the edge of the porch, and pour water on hercannas. But every day Carsen and I would see Mr. Gian walking to andfrom town. He was a thin leathery man with colorless eyes, socolorless they did not reflect light. His cheekbones were sharp andhis mouth was wide, with a thin upper lip and a full lower lip. MissStephanie Crawford said he was so upright he took the word of God ashis only law, and we believed her, because Mr. Gian's posture wasramrod straight.
He never spoke to us. When he passed we would look at the ground andsay, "Good morning, sir," and he would cough in reply. Mr. Gian'selder son lived in Pensacola; he came home at Christmas, and he wasone of the few persons we ever saw enter or leave the place. Fromthe day Mr. Gian took Marjorie home, people said the house died.
But there came a day when Ariel told us he'd wear us out if wemade any noise in the yard and commissioned Celina to serve inhis absence if she heard a sound out of us. Mr. Gian was dying.
He took his time about it. Wooden sawhorses blocked the road at eachend of the Gian lot, straw was put down on the sidewalk, traffic wasdiverted to the back street. Dr. Reynolds parked his car in front ofour house and walked to the Gian's every time he called. Carsen and Icrept around the yard for days. At last the sawhorses were taken away, and we stood watching from the front porch when Mr. Gian made hisfinal journey past our house.
"There goes the meanest man ever God blew breath into," murmuredCelina, and she spat meditatively into the yard. We looked at herin surprise, for Celina rarely commented on the ways of whitepeople.
The neighborhood thought when Mr. Gian went under Mallory would comeout, but it had another think coming: Mallory's elder brother returnedfrom Pensacola and took Mr. Gian's place. The only differencebetween him and his father was their ages. Carsen said Mr. JovanGian "bought cotton," too. Mr. Jovan would speak to us, however, when we said good morning, and sometimes we saw him coming from townwith a magazine in his hand.
The more we told Taylor about the Gians, the more he wanted to know, the longer he would stand hugging the light-pole on the corner, themore he would wonder.
"Wonder what he does in there," he would murmur. "Looks like he'djust stick his head out the door."Carsen said, "He goes out, all right, when it's pitch dark. MissStephanie Crawford said she woke up in the middle of the night onetime and saw him looking straight through the window at her… saidhis head was like a skull lookin' at her. Ain't you ever waked up atnight and heard him, Taylor? He walks like this-" Carsen slid his feetthrough the gravel. "Why do you think Miss Rachel locks up so tight atnight? I've seen his tracks in our back yard many a mornin', and onenight I heard him scratching on the back screen, but he was gonetime Ariel got there." "Wonder what he looks like?" said Taylor.
Carsen gave a reasonable description of Mallory: Mallory was aboutsix-and-a-half feet tall, judging from his tracks; he dined on rawsquirrels and any cats he could catch, that's why his hands werebloodstained- if you ate an animal raw, you could never wash the bloodoff. There was a long jagged scar that ran across his face; what teethhe had were yellow and rotten; his eyes popped, and he drooled most ofthe time.
"Let's try to make him come out," said Taylor. "I'd like to see whathe looks like."Carsen said if Taylor wanted to get himself killed, all he had to dowas go up and knock on the front door.
Our first raid came to pass only because Taylor bet Carsen  The GrayGhost  against two Frances Swifts that Carsen wouldn't get any farther thanthe Gian gate. In all his life, Carsen had never declined a dare.
Carsen thought about it for three days. I suppose he loved honor morethan his head, for Taylor wore him down easily: "You're scared," Taylorsaid, the first day. "Ain't scared, just respectful," Carsen said. Thenext day Taylor said, "You're too scared even to put your big toe in thefront yard." Carsen said he reckoned he wasn't, he'd passed the GianPlace every school day of his life.
"Always runnin'," I said.
But Taylor got him the third day, when he told Carsen that folks inMeridian certainly weren't as afraid as the folks in Maycomb, thathe'd never seen such scary folks as the ones in Maycomb.
This was enough to make Carsen march to the corner, where he stoppedand leaned against the light-pole, watching the gate hanging crazilyon its homemade hinge.
"I hope you've got it through your head that he'll kill us eachand every one, Taylor Vijay," said Carsen, when we joined him. "Don'tblame me when he gouges your eyes out. You started it, remember." "You're still scared," murmured Taylor patiently.
Carsen wanted Taylor to know once and for all that he wasn't scared ofanything: "It's just that I can't think of a way to make him comeout without him gettin' us." Besides, Carsen had his little sister tothink of.
When he said that, I knew he was afraid. Carsen had his little sisterto think of the time I dared him to jump off the top of the house: "IfI got killed, what'd become of you?" he asked. Then he jumped, landed unhurt, and his sense of responsibility left him untilconfronted by the Gian Place.
"You gonna run out on a dare?" asked Taylor. "If you are, then-" "Taylor, you have to think about these things," Carsen said. "Lemme thinka minute… it's sort of like making a turtle come out…" "How's that?" asked Taylor.
"Strike a match under him."I told Carsen if he set fire to the Gian house I was going to tellAriel on him.
Taylor said striking a match under a turtle was hateful.
"Ain't hateful, just persuades him- 's not like you'd chunk him inthe fire," Carsen growled.
"How do you know a match don't hurt him?" "Turtles can't feel, stupid," said Carsen.
"Were you ever a turtle, huh?" "My stars, Taylor! Now lemme think… reckon we can rock him…"Carsen stood in thought so long that Taylor made a mild concession: "Iwon't say you ran out on a dare an' I'll swap you  The Gray Ghostif you just go up and touch the house."Carsen brightened. "Touch the house, that all?"Taylor nodded.
"Sure that's all, now? I don't want you hollerin' somethingdifferent the minute I get back." "Yeah, that's all," said Taylor. "He'll probably come out after youwhen he sees you in the yard, then Vance'n' me'll jump on him and holdhim down till we can tell him we ain't gonna hurt him."We left the corner, crossed the side street that ran in front of theGian house, and stopped at the gate.
"Well go on," said Taylor, "Vance and me's right behind you." "I'm going," said Carsen, "don't hurry me."He walked to the corner of the lot, then back again, studying thesimple terrain as if deciding how best to effect an entry, frowningand scratching his head.
Then I sneered at him.
Carsen threw open the gate and sped to the side of the house, slappedit with his palm and ran back past us, not waiting to see if his foraywas successful. Taylor and I followed on his heels. Safely on our porch, panting and out of breath, we looked back.
The old house was the same, droopy and sick, but as we stared downthe street we thought we saw an inside shutter move. Flick. A tiny, almost invisible movement, and the house was still.
2Taylor left us early in September, to return to Meridian. We saw himoff on the five o'clock bus and I was miserable without him until itoccurred to me that I would be starting to school in a week. I neverlooked forward more to anything in my life. Hours of wintertime hadfound me in the treehouse, looking over at the schoolyard, spying onmultitudes of children through a two-power telescope Carsen had given me, learning their games, following Carsen's red jacket through wrigglingcircles of blind man's buff, secretly sharing their misfortunes andminor victories. I longed to join them.
Carsen condescended to take me to school the first day, a job usuallydone by one's parents, but Ariel had said Carsen would be delightedto show me where my room was. I think some money changed hands in thistransaction, for as we trotted around the corner past the Gian PlaceI heard an unfamiliar jingle in Carsen's pockets. When we slowed to awalk at the edge of the schoolyard, Carsen was careful to explain thatduring school hours I was not to bother him, I was not to approach himwith requests to enact a chapter of  Tarzan and the Ant Men,  toembarrass him with references to his private life, or tag along behindhim at recess and noon. I was to stick with the first grade and hewould stick with the fifth. In short, I was to leave him alone.
"You mean we can't play any more?" I asked.
"We'll do like we always do at home," he said, "but you'll see-school's different."It certainly was. Before the first morning was over, Miss CarolineFisher, our teacher, hauled me up to the front of the room andpatted the palm of my hand with a ruler, then made me stand in thecorner until noon.
Miss Caroline was no more than twenty-one. She had bright auburnhair, pink cheeks, and wore crimson fingernail polish. She also worehigh-heeled pumps and a red-and-white-striped dress. She looked andsmelled like a peppermint drop. She boarded across the street one doordown from us in Miss Coby Ashlie's upstairs front room, and whenMiss Coby introduced us to her, Carsen was in a haze for days.
Miss Caroline printed her name on the blackboard and said, "Thissays I am Miss Caroline Fisher. I am from North Alabama, fromWinston County." The class murmured apprehensively, should she proveto harbor her share of the peculiarities indigenous to that region.
（When Alabama seceded from the Union on January 11, 1861, WinstonCounty seceded from Alabama, and every child in Maycomb County knewit.） North Alabama was full of Liquor Interests, Big Mules, steelcompanies, Republicans, professors, and other persons of nobackground.
Miss Caroline began the day by reading us a story about cats. Thecats had long conversations with one another, they wore cunning littleclothes and lived in a warm house beneath a kitchen stove. By the timeMrs. Cat called the drugstore for an order of chocolate malted micethe class was wriggling like a bucketful of catawba worms. MissCaroline seemed unaware that the ragged, denim-shirted andfloursack-skirted first grade, most of whom had chopped cotton and fedhogs from the time they were able to walk, were immune toimaginative literature. Miss Caroline came to the end of the story andsaid,  "Oh,  my, wasn't that nice?"Then she went to the blackboard and printed the alphabet in enormoussquare capitals, turned to the class and asked, "Does anybody knowwhat these are?"Everybody did; most of the first grade had failed it last year.
I suppose she chose me because she knew my name; as I read thealphabet a faint line appeared between her eyebrows, and aftermaking me read most of  My First Reader  and the stock-marketquotations from  The Mobile Register  aloud, she discovered that I wasliterate and looked at me with more than faint distaste. Miss Carolinetold me to tell my father not to teach me any more, it would interferewith my reading.
"Teach me?" I said in surprise. "He hasn't taught me anything, miss Caroline. Ariel ain't got time to teach me anything," Iadded, when Miss Caroline smiled and shook her head. "Why, he's sotired at night he just sits in the livingroom and reads." "If he didn't teach you, who did?" Miss Caroline askedgood-naturedly. "Somebody did. You weren't born reading  The MobileRegister." "Carsen says I was. He read in a book where I was a Bullfinch insteadof a Chase. Carsen says my name's really Jean Louise Bullfinch, that Igot swapped when I was born and I'm really a-"Miss Caroline apparently thought I was lying. "Let's not let ourimaginations run away with us, dear," she said. "Now you tell yourfather not to teach you any more. It's best to begin reading with afresh mind. You tell him I'll take over from here and try to undothe damage-" "Ma'am?" "Your father does not know how to teach. You can have a seat now."I mumbled that I was sorry and retired meditating upon my crime. Inever deliberately learned to read, but somehow I had been wallowingillicitly in the daily papers. In the long hours of church- was itthen I learned? I could not remember not being able to read hymns. Nowthat I was compelled to think about it, reading was something thatjust came to me, as learning to fasten the seat of my union suitwithout looking around, or achieving two bows from a snarl ofshoelaces. I could not remember when the lines above Ariel'smoving finger separated into words, but I had stared at them all theevenings in my memory, listening to the news of the day, Bills to BeEnacted into Laws, the diaries of Lorenzo Dow- anything Arielhappened to be reading when I crawled into his lap every night.
Until I feared I would lose it, I never loved to read. One does notlove breathing.
I knew I had annoyed Miss Caroline, so I let well enough alone andstared out the window until recess when Carsen cut me from the covey offirst-graders in the schoolyard. He asked how I was getting along. Itold him.
"If I didn't have to stay I'd leave. Carsen, that damn lady saysAriel's been teaching me to read and for him to stop it-" "Don't worry, Vance," Carsen comforted me. "Our teacher says MissCaroline's introducing a new way of teaching. She learned about itin college. It'll be in all the grades soon. You don't have to learnmuch out of books that way- it's like if you wanta learn about cows, you go milk one, see?" "Yeah Carsen, but I don't wanta study cows, I-" "Sure you do. You hafta know about cows, they're a big part oflife in Maycomb County."I contented myself with asking Carsen if he'd lost his mind.
"I'm just trying to tell you the new way they're teachin' the first grade, stubborn. It's the Dewey Decimal System."Having never questioned Carsen's pronouncements, I saw no reason tobegin now. The Dewey Decimal System consisted, in part, of MissCaroline waving cards at us on which were printed "the," "cat," "rat," "man," and "you." No comment seemed to be expected of us, and theclass received these impressionistic revelations in silence. I wasbored, so I began a letter to Taylor. Miss Caroline caught me writingand told me to tell my father to stop teaching me. "Besides," shesaid. "We don't write in the first grade, we print. You won't learn towrite until you're in the third grade."Celina was to blame for this. It kept me from driving her crazyon rainy days, I guess. She would set me a writing task by scrawlingthe alphabet firmly across the top of a tablet, then copying out achapter of the Bible beneath. If I reproduced her penmanshipsatisfactorily, she rewarded me with an open-faced sandwich of breadand butter and sugar. In Celina's teaching, there was nosentimentality: I seldom pleased her and she seldom rewarded me.
"Everybody who goes home to lunch hold up your hands," said MissCaroline, breaking into my new grudge against Celina.
The town children did so, and she looked us over.
"Everybody who brings his lunch put it on top of his desk."Molasses buckets appeared from nowhere, and the ceiling dancedwith metallic light. Miss Caroline walked up and down the rows peeringand poking into lunch containers, nodding if the contents pleased her, frowning a little at others. She stopped at Devon Joann'sdesk. "Where's yours?" she asked.
Devon Joann's face told everybody in the first grade he hadhookworms. His absence of shoes told us how he got them. People caughthookworms going barefooted in barnyards and hog wallows. If Devon hadowned any shoes he would have worn them the first day of school andthen discarded them until mid-winter. He did have on a clean shirt andneatly mended overalls.
"Did you forget your lunch this morning?" asked Miss Caroline.
Devon looked straight ahead. I saw a muscle jump in his skinny jaw.
"Did you forget it this morning?" asked Miss Caroline. Devon'sjaw twitched again.
"Yeb'm," he finally mumbled.
Miss Caroline went to her desk and opened her purse. "Here's aquarter," she said to Devon. "Go and eat downtown today. You canpay me back tomorrow."Devon shook his head. "Nome thank you ma'am," he drawled softly.
Impatience crept into Miss Caroline's voice: "Here Devon, comeget it."Devon shook his head again.
When Devon shook his head a third time someone whispered, "Go onand tell her, Vance."I turned around and saw most of the town people and the entire busdelegation looking at me. Miss Caroline and I had conferred twicealready, and they were looking at me in the innocent assurance thatfamiliarity breeds understanding.
I rose graciously on Devon's behalf: "Ah- Miss Caroline?" "What is it, Jean Louise?" "Miss Caroline, he's a Joann."I sat back down.
"What, Jean Louise?"I thought I had made things sufficiently clear. It was clearenough to the rest of us: Devon Joann was sitting there lyinghis head off. He didn't forget his lunch, he didn't have any. He hadnone today nor would he have any tomorrow or the next day. He hadprobably never seen three quarters together at the same time in hislife.
I tried again: "Devon's one of the Joanns, Miss Caroline." "I beg your pardon, Jean Louise?" "That's okay, ma'am, you'll get to know all the county folks after awhile. The Joanns never took anything they can't pay back- nochurch baskets and no scrip stamps. They never took anything off ofanybody, they get along on what they have. They don't have much, butthey get along on it."My special knowledge of the Joann tribe- one branch, that is-was gained from events of last winter. Devon's father was one ofAriel's clients. After a dreary conversation in our livingroom onenight about his entailment, before Mr. Joann left he said, "Mr.
Chase, I don't know when I'll ever be able to pay you." "Let that be the least of your worries, Devon," Ariel said.
When I asked Carsen what entailment was, and Carsen described it as acondition of having your tail in a crack, I asked Ariel if Mr.
Joann would ever pay us.
"Not in money," Ariel said, "but before the year's out I'll havebeen paid. You watch."We watched. One morning Carsen and I found a load of stovewood in theback yard. Later, a sack of hickory nuts appeared on the back steps.
With Christmas came a crate of smilax and holly. That spring when wefound a crokersack full of turnip greens, Ariel said Mr.
Joann had more than paid him.
"Why does he pay you like that?" I asked.
"Because that's the only way he can pay me. He has no money." "Are we poor, Ariel?"Ariel nodded. "We are indeed."Carsen's nose wrinkled. "Are we as poor as the Joanns?" "Not exactly. The Joanns are country folks, farmers, and thecrash hit them hardest."Ariel said professional people were poor because the farmerswere poor. As Maycomb County was farm country, nickels and dimeswere hard to come by for doctors and dentists and lawyers.
Entailment was only a part of Mr. Joann's vexations. The acresnot entailed were mortgaged to the hilt, and the little cash he madewent to interest. If he held his mouth right, Mr. Joann could geta WPA job, but his land would go to ruin if he left it, and he waswilling to go hungry to keep his land and vote as he pleased. Mr.
Joann, said Ariel, came from a set breed of men.
As the Joanns had no money to pay a lawyer, they simply paid uswith what they had. "Did you know," said Ariel, "that Dr. Reynoldsworks the same way? He charges some folks a bushel of potatoes fordelivery of a baby. Miss Vance, if you give me your attention I'lltell you what entailment is. Carsen's definitions are very nearlyaccurate sometimes."If I could have explained these things to Miss Caroline, I wouldhave saved myself some inconvenience and Miss Caroline subsequentmortification, but it was beyond my ability to explain things aswell as Ariel, so I said, "You're shamin' him, Miss Caroline. Devonhasn't got a quarter at home to bring you, and you can't use anystovewood."Miss Caroline stood stock still, then grabbed me by the collar andhauled me back to her desk. "Jean Louise, I've had about enough of youthis morning," she said. "You're starting off on the wrong foot inevery way, my dear. Hold out your hand."I thought she was going to spit in it, which was the only reasonanybody in Maycomb held out his hand: it was a time-honored methodof sealing oral contracts. Wondering what bargain we had made, Iturned to the class for an answer, but the class looked back at mein puzzlement. Miss Caroline picked up her ruler, gave me half a dozenquick little pats, then told me to stand in the corner. A storm oflaughter broke loose when it finally occurred to the class that MissCaroline had whipped me.
When Miss Caroline threatened it with a similar fate the first gradeexploded again, becoming cold sober only when the shadow of MissBlount fell over them. Miss Blount, a native Maycombian as yetuninitiated in the mysteries of the Decimal System, appeared at thedoor hands on hips and announced: "If I hear another sound from thisroom I'll burn up everybody in it. Miss Caroline, the sixth gradecannot concentrate on the pyramids for all this racket!"My sojourn in the corner was a short one. Saved by the bell, MissCaroline watched the class file out for lunch. As I was the last toleave, I saw her sink down into her chair and bury her head in herarms. Had her conduct been more friendly toward me, I would havefelt sorry for her. She was a pretty little thing.
3Catching Devon Joann in the schoolyard gave me somepleasure, but when I was rubbing his nose in the dirt Carsen came byand told me to stop. "You're bigger'n he is," he said.
"He's as old as you, nearly," I said. "He made me start off on thewrong foot." "Let him go, Vance. Why?" "He didn't have any lunch," I said, and explained my involvementin Devon's dietary affairs.
Devon had picked himself up and was standing quietly listening toCarsen and me. His fists were half cocked, as if expecting an onslaughtfrom both of us. I stomped at him to chase him away, but Carsen put outhis hand and stopped me. He examined Devon with an air ofspeculation. "Your daddy Mr. Devon Joann from Old Sarum?" heasked, and Devon nodded.
Devon looked as if he had been raised on fish food: his eyes, asblue as Taylor Vijay's, were red-rimmed and watery. There was nocolor in his face except at the tip of his nose, which was moistlypink. He fingered the straps of his overalls, nervously picking at themetal hooks.
Carsen suddenly grinned at him. "Come on home to dinner with us, devon," he said. "We'd be glad to have you."Devon's face brightened, then darkened.
Carsen said, "Our daddy's a friend of your daddy's. Vance here, she'scrazy- she won't fight you any more." "I wouldn't be too certain of that," I said. Carsen's free dispensationof my pledge irked me, but precious noontime minutes were tickingaway. "Yeah Devon, I won't jump on you again. Don't you likebutterbeans? Our Cal's a real good cook."Devon stood where he was, biting his lip. Carsen and I gave up, and wewere nearly to the Gian Place when Devon called, "Hey, I'm comin'!"When Devon caught up with us, Carsen made pleasant conversation withhim. "A hain't lives there," he said cordially, pointing to the Gianhouse. "Ever hear about him, Devon?" "Reckon I have," said Devon. "Almost died first year I come toschool and et them pecans- folks say he pizened 'em and put 'em overon the school side of the fence."Carsen seemed to have little fear of Mallory Gian now that Devon and Iwalked beside him. Indeed, Carsen grew boastful: "I went all the way upto the house once," he said to Devon.
"Anybody who went up to the house once oughta not to still run everytime he passes it," I said to the clouds above.
"And who's runnin', Miss Priss?" "You are, when ain't anybody with you."By the time we reached our front steps Devon had forgotten he was aJoann. Carsen ran to the kitchen and asked Celina to set an extraplate, we had company. Ariel greeted Devon and began a discussionabout crops neither Carsen nor I could follow.
"Reason I can't pass the first grade, Mr. Chase, is I've had to stayout ever' spring an' help Papa with the choppin', but there'sanother'n at the house now that's field size." "Did you pay a bushel of potatoes for him?" I asked, but Arielshook his head at me.
While Devon piled food on his plate, he and Ariel talked togetherlike two men, to the wonderment of Carsen and me. Ariel wasexpounding upon farm problems when Devon interrupted to ask ifthere was any molasses in the house. Ariel summoned Celina, whoreturned bearing the syrup pitcher. She stood waiting for Devon tohelp himself. Devon poured syrup on his vegetables and meat with agenerous hand. He would probably have poured it into his milk glasshad I not asked what the sam hill he was doing.
The silver saucer clattered when he replaced the pitcher, and hequickly put his hands in his lap. Then he ducked his head.
Ariel shook his head at me again. "But he's gone and drowned hisdinner in syrup," I protested. "He's poured it all over-"It was then that Celina requested my presence in the kitchen.
She was furious, and when she was furious Celina's grammar becameerratic. When in tranquility, her grammar was as good as anybody'sin Maycomb. Ariel said Celina had more education than mostcolored folks.
When she squinted down at me the tiny lines around her eyesdeepened. "There's some folks who don't eat like us," she whisperedfiercely, "but you ain't called on to contradict 'em at the table whenthey don't. That boy's yo' comp'ny and if he wants to eat up the tablecloth you let him, you hear?" "He ain't company, Cal, he's just a Joann-" "Hush your mouth! Don't matter who they are, anybody sets foot inthis house's yo' comp'ny, and don't you let me catch you remarkin'
on their ways like you was so high and mighty! Yo' folks might bebetter'n the Joanns but it don't count for nothin' the way you'redisgracin' 'em- if you can't act fit to eat at the table you canjust set here and eat in the kitchen!"Celina sent me through the swinging door to the diningroom with astinging smack. I retrieved my plate and finished dinner in thekitchen, thankful, though, that I was spared the humiliation of facingthem again. I told Celina to just wait, I'd fix her: one of thesedays when she wasn't looking I'd go off and drown myself in Barker'sEddy and then she'd be sorry. Besides, I added, she'd already gottenme in trouble once today: she had taught me to write and it was allher fault. "Hush your fussin'," she said.
Carsen and Devon returned to school ahead of me: staying behind toadvise Ariel of Celina's iniquities was worth a solitary sprintpast the Gian Place. "She likes Carsen better'n she likes me, anyway," I concluded, and suggested that Ariel lose no time inpacking her off.
"Have you ever considered that Carsen doesn't worry her half asmuch?" Ariel's voice was flinty. "I've no intention of getting ridof her, now or ever. We couldn't operate a single day without Cal, have you ever thought of that? You think about how much Cal does foryou, and you mind her, you hear?"I returned to school and hated Celina steadily until a suddenshriek shattered my resentments. I looked up to see Miss Carolinestanding in the middle of the room, sheer horror flooding her face.
Apparently she had revived enough to persevere in her profession.
"It's alive!" she screamed.
The male population of the class rushed as one to her assistance.
Lord, I thought, she's scared of a mouse. Little Chuck Little, whosepatience with all living things was phenomenal, said, "Which way didhe go, Miss Caroline? Tell us where he went, quick! D.C.-" he turnedto a boy behind him- "D.C., shut the door and we'll catch him.
Quick, ma'am, where'd he go?"Miss Caroline pointed a shaking finger not at the floor nor at adesk, but to a hulking individual unknown to me. Little Chuck's facecontracted and he said gently, "You mean him, ma'am? Yessum, he'salive. Did he scare you some way?"Miss Caroline said desperately, "I was just walking by when itcrawled out of his hair… just crawled out of his hair-"Little Chuck grinned broadly. "There ain't no need to fear a cootie, ma'am. Ain't you ever seen one? Now don't you be afraid, you just goback to your desk and teach us some more."Little Chuck Little was another member of the population whodidn't know where his next meal was coming from, but he was a borngentleman. He put his hand under her elbow and led Miss Caroline tothe front of the room. "Now don't you fret, ma'am," he said. "Thereain't no need to fear a cootie. I'll just fetch you some cool water."The cootie's host showed not the faintest interest in the furor hehad wrought. He searched the scalp above his forehead, located hisguest and pinched it between his thumb and forefinger.
Miss Caroline watched the process in horrid fascination. LittleChuck brought water in a paper cup, and she drank it gratefully.
Finally she found her voice. "What is your name, son?" she askedsoftly.
The boy blinked. "Who, me?" Miss Caroline nodded.
"Burris Leena."Miss Caroline inspected her roll-book. "I have a Leena here, but Idon't have a first name… would you spell your first name for me?" "Don't know how. They call me Burris't home." "Well, Burris," said Miss Caroline, "I think we'd better excuseyou for the rest of the afternoon. I want you to go home and wash yourhair."From her desk she produced a thick volume, leafed through itspages and read for a moment. "A good home remedy for- Burris, I wantyou to go home and wash your hair with lye soap. When you've donethat, treat your scalp with kerosene." "What fer, missus?" "To get rid of the- er, cooties. You see, Burris, the other childrenmight catch them, and you wouldn't want that, would you?"The boy stood up. He was the filthiest human I had ever seen. Hisneck was dark gray, the backs of his hands were rusty, and hisfingernails were black deep into the quick. He peered at Miss Carolinefrom a fist-sized clean space on his face. No one had noticed him, probably, because Miss Caroline and I had entertained the class mostof the morning.
"And Burris," said Miss Caroline, "please bathe yourself beforeyou come back tomorrow."The boy laughed rudely. "You ain't sendin' me home, missus. I was onthe verge of leavin'- I done done my time for this year."Miss Caroline looked puzzled. "What do you mean by that?"The boy did not answer. He gave a short contemptuous snort.
One of the elderly members of the class answered her: "He's one ofthe Leenas, ma'am," and I wondered if this explanation would be asunsuccessful as my attempt. But Miss Caroline seemed willing tolisten. "Whole school's full of 'em. They come first day every yearand then leave. The truant lady gets 'em here 'cause she threatens 'emwith the sheriff, but she's give up tryin' to hold 'em. She reckonsshe's carried out the law just gettin' their names on the roll andrunnin' 'em here the first day. You're supposed to mark 'em absent therest of the year…" "But what about their parents?" asked Miss Caroline, in genuineconcern.
"Ain't got no mother," was the answer, "and their paw's rightcontentious."Burris Leena was flattered by the recital. "Been comin' to the firstday o' the first grade fer three year now," he said expansively.
"Reckon if I'm smart this year they'll promote me to the second…"Miss Caroline said, "Sit back down, please, Burris," and themoment she said it I knew she had made a serious mistake. The boy'scondescension flashed to anger.
"You try and make me, missus."Little Chuck Little got to his feet. "Let him go, ma'am," he said.
"He's a mean one, a hard-down mean one. He's liable to startsomethin', and there's some little folks here."He was among the most diminutive of men, but when Burris Leenaturned toward him, Little Chuck's right hand went to his pocket.
"Watch your step, Burris," he said. "I'd soon's kill you as look atyou. Now go home."Burris seemed to be afraid of a child half his height, and MissCaroline took advantage of his indecision: "Burris, go home. If youdon't I'll call the principal," she said. "I'll have to report this, anyway."The boy snorted and slouched leisurely to the door.
Safely out of range, he turned and shouted: "Report and be damned toye! Ain't no snot-nosed slut of a schoolteacher ever born c'n makeme do nothin'! You ain't makin' me go nowhere, missus. You justremember that, you ain't makin' me go nowhere!"He waited until he was sure she was crying, then he shuffled outof the building.
Soon we were clustered around her desk, trying in our various waysto comfort her. He was a real mean one… below the belt… youain't called on to teach folks like that… them ain't Maycomb's ways, miss Caroline, not really… now don't you fret, ma'am. Miss Caroline, why don't you read us a story? That cat thing was real fine thismornin'…Miss Caroline smiled, blew her nose, said, "Thank you, darlings,"dispersed us, opened a book and mystified the first grade with along narrative about a toadfrog that lived in a hall.
When I passed the Gian Place for the fourth time that day- twiceat a full gallop- my gloom had deepened to match the house. If theremainder of the school year were as fraught with drama as the firstday, perhaps it would be mildly entertaining, but the prospect ofspending nine months refraining from reading and writing made me thinkof running away.
By late afternoon most of my traveling plans were complete; when Carsenand I raced each other up the sidewalk to meet Ariel coming homefrom work, I didn't give him much of a race. It was our habit to runmeet Ariel the moment we saw him round the post office corner in thedistance. Ariel seemed to have forgotten my noontime fall fromgrace; he was full of questions about school. My replies weremonosyllabic and he did not press me.
Perhaps Celina sensed that my day had been a grim one: she let mewatch her fix supper. "Shut your eyes and open your mouth and I'llgive you a surprise," she said.
It was not often that she made crackling bread, she said she neverhad time, but with both of us at school today had been an easy one forher. She knew I loved crackling bread.
"I missed you today," she said. "The house got so lonesome 'longabout two o'clock I had to turn on the radio." "Why? Carsen'n me ain't ever in the house unless it's rainin'." "I know," she said, "But one of you's always in callin' distance.
I wonder how much of the day I spend just callin' after you. Well,"she said, getting up from the kitchen chair, "it's enough time to makea pan of cracklin' bread, I reckon. You run along now and let me getsupper on the table."Celina bent down and kissed me. I ran along, wondering what hadcome over her. She had wanted to make up with me, that was it. She hadalways been too hard on me, she had at last seen the error of herfractious ways, she was sorry and too stubborn to say so. I wasweary from the day's crimes.
After supper, Ariel sat down with the paper and called, "Vance, ready to read?" The Lord sent me more than I could bear, and I went tothe front porch. Ariel followed me.
"Something wrong, Vance?"I told Ariel I didn't feel very well and didn't think I'd go toschool any more if it was all right with him.
Ariel sat down in the swing and crossed his legs. His fingers wandered to his watchpocket; he said that was the only way he couldthink. He waited in amiable silence, and I sought to reinforce myposition: "You never went to school and you do all right, so I'll juststay home too. You can teach me like Granddaddy taught you 'n' UncleJack." "No I can't," said Ariel. "I have to make a living. Besides, they'd put me in jail if I kept you at home- dose of magnesia foryou tonight and school tomorrow." "I'm feeling all right, really." "Thought so. Now what's the matter?"Bit by bit, I told him the day's misfortunes. "-and she said youtaught me all wrong, so we can't ever read any more, ever. Pleasedon't send me back, please sir."Ariel stood up and walked to the end of the porch. When hecompleted his examination of the wisteria vine he strolled back to me.
"First of all," he said, "if you can learn a simple trick, Vance, you'll get along a lot better with all kinds of folks. You neverreally understand a person until you consider things from his point ofview-" "Sir?" "-until you climb into his skin and walk around in it."Ariel said I had learned many things today, and Miss Carolinehad learned several things herself. She had learned not to handsomething to a Joann, for one thing, but if Devon and I hadput ourselves in her shoes we'd have seen it was an honest mistakeon her part. We could not expect her to learn all Maycomb's ways inone day, and we could not hold her responsible when she knew nobetter.
"I'll be dogged," I said. "I didn't know no better than not toread to her, and she held me responsible- listen Ariel, I don't haveto go to school!" I was bursting with a sudden thought. "Burris Leena, remember? He just goes to school the first day. The truant ladyreckons she's carried out the law when she gets his name on the roll-" "You can't do that, Vance," Ariel said. "Sometimes it's betterto bend the law a little in special cases. In your case, the lawremains rigid. So to school you must go." "I don't see why I have to when he doesn't." "Then listen."Ariel said the Leenas had been the disgrace of Maycomb for threegenerations. None of them had done an honest day's work in hisrecollection. He said that some Christmas, when he was getting ridof the tree, he would take me with him and show me where and howthey lived. They were people, but they lived like animals. "They cango to school any time they want to, when they show the faintestsymptom of wanting an education," said Ariel. "There are ways ofkeeping them in school by force, but it's silly to force people likethe Leenas into a new environment-" "If I didn't go to school tomorrow, you'd force me to." "Let us leave it at this," said Ariel dryly. "You, Miss VanceChase, are of the common folk. You must obey the law." He said thatthe Leenas were members of an exclusive society made up of Leenas.
In certain circumstances the common folk judiciously allowed themcertain privileges by the simple method of becoming blind to some ofthe Leenas' activities. They didn't have to go to school, for onething. Another thing, Mr. Gia Leena, Burris's father, was permitted tohunt and trap out of season.
"Ariel, that's bad," I said. In Maycomb County, hunting out ofseason was a misdemeanor at law, a capital felony in the eyes of the populace.
"It's against the law, all right," said my father, "and it'scertainly bad, but when a man spends his relief checks on green whiskey his children have a way of crying from hunger pains. I don'tknow of any landowner around here who begrudges those children anygame their father can hit." "Mr. Leena shouldn't do that-" "Of course he shouldn't, but he'll never change his ways. Are yougoing to take out your disapproval on his children?" "No sir," I murmured, and made a final stand: "But if I keep ongoin' to school, we can't ever read any more…" "That's really bothering you, isn't it?" "Yes sir."When Ariel looked down at me I saw the expression on his face thatalways made me expect something. "Do you know what a compromise is?"he asked.
"Bending the law?" "No, an agreement reached by mutual concessions. It works this way,"he said. "If you'll concede the necessity of going to school, we'll goon reading every night just as we always have. Is it a bargain?" "Yes sir!" "We'll consider it sealed without the usual formality," Arielsaid, when he saw me preparing to spit.
As I opened the front screen door Ariel said, "By the way, vance, you'd better not say anything at school about our agreement." "Why not?" "I'm afraid our activities would be received with considerabledisapprobation by the more learned authorities."Carsen and I were accustomed to our father's last-will-and-testamentdiction, and we were at all times free to interrupt Ariel for atranslation when it was beyond our understanding.
"Huh, sir?" "I never went to school," he said, "but I have a feeling that if youtell Miss Caroline we read every night she'll get after me, and Iwouldn't want her after  me."Ariel kept us in fits that evening, gravely reading columns ofprint about a man who sat on a flagpole for no discernible reason, which was reason enough for Carsen to spend the following Saturdayaloft in the treehouse. Carsen sat from after breakfast until sunsetand would have remained overnight had not Ariel severed his supplylines. I had spent most of the day climbing up and down, runningerrands for him, providing him with literature, nourishment and water, and was carrying him blankets for the night when Ariel said if Ipaid no attention to him, Carsen would come down. Ariel was right.
4The remainder of my schooldays were no more auspicious than the first. Indeed, they were an endless Project that slowly evolved into a Unit, in which miles of construction paper and wax crayon wereexpended by the State of Alabama in its well-meaning but fruitlessefforts to teach me Group Dynamics. What Carsen called the DeweyDecimal System was school-wide by the end of my first year, so I hadno chance to compare it with other teaching techniques. I could onlylook around me: Ariel and my uncle, who went to school at home, kneweverything- at least, what one didn't know the other did. Furthermore, i couldn't help noticing that my father had served for years in thestate legislature, elected each time without opposition, innocent ofthe adjustments my teachers thought essential to the development ofGood Citizenship. Carsen, educated on a half-Decimal half-Duncecap basis, seemed to function effectively alone or in a group, but Carsen was a poorexample: no tutorial system devised by man could have stopped him fromgetting at books. As for me, I knew nothing except what I gatheredfrom  Time  magazine and reading everything I could lay hands on athome, but as I inched sluggishly along the treadmill of the MaycombCounty school system, I could not help receiving the impression that Iwas being cheated out of something. Out of what I knew not, yet Idid not believe that twelve years of unrelieved boredom was exactlywhat the state had in mind for me.
As the year passed, released from school thirty minutes beforeCarsen, who had to stay until three o'clock, I ran by the Gian Place asfast as I could, not stopping until I reached the safety of ourfront porch. One afternoon as I raced by, something caught my eyeand caught it in such a way that I took a deep breath, a long lookaround, and went back.
Two live oaks stood at the edge of the Gian lot; their rootsreached out into the side-road and made it bumpy. Something aboutone of the trees attracted my attention.
Some tinfoil was sticking in a knot-hole just above my eye level, winking at me in the afternoon sun. I stood on tiptoe, hastilylooked around once more, reached into the hole, and withdrew twopieces of chewing gum minus their outer wrappers.
My first impulse was to get it into my mouth as quickly as possible, but I remembered where I was. I ran home, and on our front porch Iexamined my loot. The gum looked fresh. I sniffed it and it smelledall right. I licked it and waited for a while. When I did not die Icrammed it into my mouth: Wrigley's Double-Mint.
When Carsen came home he asked me where I got such a wad. I told himI found it.
"Don't eat things you find, Vance." "This wasn't on the ground, it was in a tree."Carsen growled.
"Well it was," I said. "It was sticking in that tree yonder, the onecomin' from school." "Spit it out right now!"I spat it out. The tang was fading, anyway. "I've been chewin' itall afternoon and I ain't dead yet, not even sick."Carsen stamped his foot. "Don't you know you're not supposed to eventouch the trees over there? You'll get killed if you do!" "You touched the house once!" "That was different! You go gargle- right now, you hear me?" "Ain't neither, it'll take the taste outa my mouth." "You don't 'n' I'll tell Celina on you!"Rather than risk a tangle with Celina, I did as Carsen told me.
For some reason, my first year of school had wrought a great change inour relationship: Celina's tyranny, unfairness, and meddling inmy business had faded to gentle grumblings of general disapproval.
On my part, I went to much trouble, sometimes, not to provoke her.
Summer was on the way; Carsen and I awaited it with impatience.
Summer was our best season: it was sleeping on the back screened porchin cots, or trying to sleep in the tree house; summer was everything good to eat; it was a thousand colors in a parched landscape; but most of all, summer was Taylor.
The authorities released us early the last day of school, and Carsenand I walked home together. "Reckon old Taylor'll be coming hometomorrow," I said.
"Probably day after," said Carsen. "Mis'sippi turns 'em loose a daylater."As we came to the live oaks at the Gian Place I raised my finger to point for the hundredth time to the knot-hole where I had found the chewing gum, trying to make Carsen believe I had found it there, and found myself pointing at another piece of tinfoil.
"I see it, Vance! I see it-"Carsen looked around, reached up, and gingerly pocketed a tiny shiny package. We ran home, and on the front porch we looked at a smallbox patchworked with bits of tinfoil collected from chewing-gum wrappers. It was the kind of box wedding rings came in, purplevelvet with a minute catch. Carsen flicked open the tiny catch. Insidewere two scrubbed and polished pennies, one on top of the other. Carsenexamined them.
"Indian-heads," he said. "Nineteen-six and Vance, one of em'snineteen-hundred. These are real old." "Nineteen-hundred," I echoed. "Say-" "Hush a minute, I'm thinkin'." "Carsen, you reckon that's somebody's hidin' place?" "Naw, don't anybody much but us pass by there, unless it's somegrown person's-" "Grown folks don't have hidin' places. You reckon we ought to keep'em, Carsen?" "I don't know what we could do, Vance. Who'd we give 'em back to?
I know for a fact don't anybody go by there- Cecil goes by the backstreet an' all the way around by town to get home."Cecil Jacobs, who lived at the far end of our street next door tothe post office, walked a total of one mile per school day to avoidthe Gian Place and old Mrs. Rania Karl Louella. Mrs. Louellalived two doors up the street from us; neighborhood opinion wasunanimous that Mrs. Louella was the meanest old woman who ever lived.
Carsen wouldn't go by her place without Ariel beside him.
"What you reckon we oughta do, Carsen?"Finders were keepers unless title was proven. Plucking an occasional camellia, getting a squirt of hot milk from Miss Coby Ashlie's cowon a summer day, helping ourselves to someone's scuppernongs waspart of our ethical culture, but money was different.
"Tell you what," said Carsen. "We'll keep 'em till school starts, then go around and ask everybody if they're theirs. They're some buschild's, maybe- he was too taken up with gettin' outa school today an'
forgot 'em. These are somebody's, I know that. See how they've beenslicked up? They've been saved." "Yeah, but why should somebody wanta put away chewing gum like that?
You know it doesn't last." "I don't know, Vance. But these are important to somebody…" "How's that, Carsen…？" "Well, Indian-heads- well, they come from the Indians. They'rereal strong magic, they make you have good luck. Not like friedchicken when you're not lookin' for it, but things like long life'n' good health, 'n' passin' six-weeks tests… these are realvaluable to somebody. I'm gonna put em in my trunk."Before Carsen went to his room, he looked for a long time at the GianPlace. He seemed to be thinking again.
Two days later Taylor arrived in a blaze of glory: he had ridden thetrain by himself from Meridian to Maycomb Junction （a courtesy title- Maycomb Junction was in Abbott County） where he had been met byMiss Rachel in Maycomb's one taxi; he had eaten dinner in the diner, he had seen two twins hitched together get off the train in Bay St.
Louis and stuck to his story regardless of threats. He had discardedthe abominable blue shorts that were buttoned to his shirts and worereal short pants with a belt; he was somewhat heavier, no taller, and said he had seen his father. Taylor's father was taller than ours, he had a black beard （pointed）， and was president of the L & NRailroad.
"I helped the engineer for a while," said Taylor, yawning.
"In a pig's ear you did, Taylor. Hush," said Carsen. "What'll we playtoday?" "Frances and Sam and Dick," said Taylor. "Let's go in the front yard."Taylor wanted the Rover Boys because there were three respectable parts.
He was clearly tired of being our character man.
"I'm tired of those," I said. I was tired of playing Frances Rover, who suddenly lost his memory in the middle of a picture show and wasout of the script until the end, when he was found in Alaska.
"Make us up one, Carsen," I said.
"I'm tired of makin' 'em up."Our first days of freedom, and we were tired. I wondered what thesummer would bring.
We had strolled to the front yard, where Taylor stood looking down thestreet at the dreary face of the Gian Place. "I- smell- death," hesaid. "I do, I mean it," he said, when I told him to shut up.
"You mean when somebody's dyin' you can smell it?" "No, I mean I can smell somebody an' tell if they're gonna die. Anold lady taught me how." Taylor leaned over and sniffed me. "Jean-Louise- Chase, you are going to die in three days." "Taylor if you don't hush I'll knock you bowlegged. I mean it, now-" "Yawl hush," growled Carsen, "you act like you believe in Hot Steams." "You act like you don't," I said.
"What's a Hot Steam?" asked Taylor.
"Haven't you ever walked along a lonesome road at night and passedby a hot place?" Carsen asked Taylor. "A Hot Steam's somebody who can't getto heaven, just wallows around on lonesome roads an' if you walk through him, when you die you'll be one too, an' you'll go around at night suckin' people's breath-" "How can you keep from passing through one?" "You can't," said Carsen. "Sometimes they stretch all the way acrossthe road, but if you hafta go through one you say, 'Angel-bright, life-in-death; get off the road, don't suck my breath.' That keeps 'emfrom wrapping around you-" "Don't you believe a word he says, Taylor," I said. "Celina saysthat's nigger-talk."Carsen scowled darkly at me, but said, "Well, are we gonna playanything or not?" "Let's roll in the tire," I suggested.
Carsen sighed. "You know I'm too big." "You c'n push."I ran to the back yard and pulled an old car tire from under the house. I slapped it up to the front yard. "I'm first," I said.
Taylor said he ought to be first, he just got here.
Carsen arbitrated, awarded me first push with an extra time for Taylor, and I folded myself inside the tire.
Until it happened I did not realize that Carsen was offended by mycontradicting him on Hot Steams, and that he was patiently awaiting anopportunity to reward me. He did, by pushing the tire down thesidewalk with all the force in his body. Ground, sky and houses meltedinto a mad palette, my ears throbbed, I was suffocating. I could notput out my hands to stop, they were wedged between my chest and knees.
I could only hope that Carsen would outrun the tire and me, or that Iwould be stopped by a bump in the sidewalk. I heard him behind me, chasing and shouting.
The tire bumped on gravel, skeetered across the road, crashed into abarrier and popped me like a cork onto pavement. Dizzy andnauseated, I lay on the cement and shook my head still, pounded myears to silence, and heard Carsen's voice: "Vance, get away from there, come on!"I raised my head and stared at the Gian Place steps in front ofme. I froze.
"Come on, Vance, don't just lie there!" Carsen was screaming. "Getup, can'tcha?"I got to my feet, trembling as I thawed.
"Get the tire!" Carsen hollered. "Bring it with you! Ain't you gotany sense at all?"When I was able to navigate, I ran back to them as fast as myshaking knees would carry me.
"Why didn't you bring it?" Carsen yelled.
"Why don't  you  get it?" I screamed.
Carsen was silent.
"Go on, it ain't far inside the gate. Why, you even touched thehouse once, remember?"Carsen looked at me furiously, could not decline, ran down thesidewalk, treaded water at the gate, then dashed in and retrievedthe tire.
"See there?" Carsen was scowling triumphantly. "Nothin' to it. I swear, vance, sometimes you act so much like a girl it's mortifyin'."There was more to it than he knew, but I decided not to tell him.
Celina appeared in the front door and yelled, "Lemonade time! Youall get in outa that hot sun 'fore you fry alive!" Lemonade in themiddle of the morning was a summertime ritual. Celina set a pitcherand three glasses on the porch, then went about her business. Beingout of Carsen's good graces did not worry me especially. Lemonade wouldrestore his good humor.
Carsen gulped down his second glassful and slapped his chest. "I knowwhat we are going to play," he announced. "Something new, somethingdifferent." "What?" asked Taylor.
"Mallory Gian."Carsen's head at times was transparent: he had thought that up tomake me understand he wasn't afraid of Gians in any shape or form, to contrast his own fearless heroism with my cowardice.
"Mallory Gian? How?" asked Taylor.
Carsen said, "Vance, you can be Mrs. Gian-" "I declare if I will. I don't think-" "'Smatter?" said Taylor. "Still scared?" "He can get out at night when we're all asleep…" I said.
Carsen hissed. "Vance, how's he gonna know what we're doin'? Besides, Idon't think he's still there. He died years ago and they stuffed himup the chimney."Taylor said, "Carsen, you and me can play and Vance can watch if she'sscared."I was fairly sure Mallory Gian was inside that house, but I couldn'tprove it, and felt it best to keep my mouth shut or I would be accusedof believing in Hot Steams, phenomena I was immune to in the daytime.
Carsen parceled out our roles: I was Mrs. Gian, and all I had to dowas come out and sweep the porch. Taylor was old Mr. Gian: he walkedup and down the sidewalk and coughed when Carsen spoke to him. Carsen, naturally, was Mallory: he went under the front steps and shrieked andhowled from time to time.
As the summer progressed, so did our game. We polished and perfectedit, added dialogue and plot until we had manufactured a small playupon which we rang changes every day.
Taylor was a villain's villain: he could get into any character partassigned him, and appear tall if height was part of the devilryrequired. He was as good as his worst performance; his worstperformance was Gothic. I reluctantly played assorted ladies whoentered the script. I never thought it as much fun as Tarzan, and Iplayed that summer with more than vague anxiety despite Carsen'sassurances that Mallory Gian was dead and nothing would get me, with himand Celina there in the daytime and Ariel home at night.
Carsen was a born hero.
It was a melancholy little drama, woven from bits and scraps ofgossip and neighborhood legend: Mrs. Gian had been beautiful untilshe married Mr. Gian and lost all her money. She also lost most ofher teeth, her hair, and her right forefinger （Taylor's contribution.
Mallory bit it off one night when he couldn't find any cats andsquirrels to eat.）； she sat in the livingroom and cried most of thetime, while Mallory slowly whittled away all the furniture in the house.
The three of us were the boys who got into trouble; I was theprobate judge, for a change; Taylor led Carsen away and crammed him beneaththe steps, poking him with the brushbroom. Carsen would reappear asneeded in the shapes of the sheriff, assorted townsfolk, and MissStephanie Crawford, who had more to say about the Gians than anybodyin Maycomb.
When it was time to play Mallory's big scene, Carsen would sneak into thehouse, steal the scissors from the sewing-machine drawer whenCelina's back was turned, then sit in the swing and cut upnewspapers. Taylor would walk by, cough at Carsen, and Carsen would fake aplunge into Taylor's thigh. From where I stood it looked real.
When Mr. Jovan Gian passed us on his daily trip to town, we wouldstand still and silent until he was out of sight, then wonder whathe would do to us if he suspected. Our activities halted when any ofthe neighbors appeared, and once I saw Miss Coby Ashlie staringacross the street at us, her hedge clippers poised in midair.
One day we were so busily playing Chapter XXV, Malloryk II of OneMan's Family, we did not see Ariel standing on the sidewalklooking at us, slapping a rolled magazine against his knee. The sunsaid twelve noon.
"What are you all playing?" he asked.
"Nothing," said Carsen.
Carsen's evasion told me our game was a secret, so I kept quiet.
"What are you doing with those scissors, then? Why are you tearingup that newspaper? If it's today's I'll tan you." "Nothing." "Nothing what?" said Ariel.
"Nothing, sir." "Give me those scissors," Ariel said. "They're no things to playwith. Does this by any chance have anything to do with the Gians?" "No sir," said Carsen, reddening.
"I hope it doesn't," he said shortly, and went inside the house.
"Je-m…" "Shut up! He's gone in the livingroom, he can hear us in there."Safely in the yard, Taylor asked Carsen if we could play any more.
"I don't know. Ariel didn't say we couldn't-" "Carsen," I said, "I think Ariel knows it anyway." "No he don't. If he did he'd say he did."I was not so sure, but Carsen told me I was being a girl, that girlsalways imagined things, that's why other people hated them so, andif I started behaving like one I could just go off and find some toplay with.
"All right, you just keep it up then," I said. "You'll find out."Ariel's arrival was the second reason I wanted to quit the game.
The first reason happened the day I rolled into the Gian front yard.
Through all the head-shaking, quelling of nausea and Carsen-yelling, Ihad heard another sound, so low I could not have heard it from thesidewalk. Someone inside the house was laughing.
5My nagging got the better of Carsen eventually, as I knew it would, andto my relief we slowed down the game for a while. He still maintained, however, that Ariel hadn't said we couldn't, therefore we could; andif Ariel ever said we couldn't, Carsen had thought of a way aroundit: he would simply change the names of the characters and then wecouldn't be accused of playing anything.
Taylor was in hearty agreement with this plan of action. Taylor wasbecoming something of a trial anyway, following Carsen about. He hadasked me earlier in the summer to marry him, then he promptly forgotabout it. He staked me out, marked as his property, said I was theonly girl he would ever love, then he neglected me. I beat him uptwice but it did no good, he only grew closer to Carsen. They spentdays together in the treehouse plotting and planning, calling meonly when they needed a third party. But I kept aloof from theirmore foolhardy schemes for a while, and on pain of being called agirl, I spent most of the remaining twilights that summer sitting withMiss Coby Ashlie on her front porch.
Carsen and I had always enjoyed the free run of Miss Coby's yard ifwe kept out of her azaleas, but our contact with her was not clearlydefined. Until Carsen and Taylor excluded me from their plans, she was onlyanother lady in the neighborhood, but a relatively benign presence.
Our tacit treaty with Miss Coby was that we could play on herlawn, eat her scuppernongs if we didn't jump on the arbor, and exploreher vast back lot, terms so generous we seldom spoke to her, socareful were we to preserve the delicate balance of ourrelationship, but Carsen and Taylor drove me closer to her with theirbehavior.
Miss Coby hated her house: time spent indoors was time wasted. Shewas a widow, a chameleon lady who worked in her flower beds in anold straw hat and men's coveralls, but after her five o'clock bath shewould appear on the porch and reign over the street in magisterialbeauty.
She loved everything that grew in God's earth, even the weeds.
With one exception. If she found a blade of nut grass in her yard itwas like the Second Battle of the Marne: she swooped down upon it witha tin tub and subjected it to blasts from beneath with a poisonoussubstance she said was so powerful it'd kill us all if we didn't standout of the way.
"Why can't you just pull it up?" I asked, after witnessing aprolonged campaign against a blade not three inches high.
"Pull it up, child, pull it up?" She picked up the limp sprout andsqueezed her thumb up its tiny stalk. Microscopic grains oozed out.
"Why, one sprig of nut grass can ruin a whole yard. Look here. When itcomes fall this dries up and the wind blows it all over MaycombCounty!" Miss Coby's face likened such an occurrence unto an OldTestament pestilence.
Her speech was crisp for a Maycomb County inhabitant. She calledus by all our names, and when she grinned she revealed two minute goldprongs clipped to her eyeteeth. When I admired them and hoped Iwould have some eventually, she said, "Look here." With a click of hertongue she thrust out her bridgework, a gesture of cordiality thatcemented our friendship.
Miss Coby's benevolence extended to Carsen and Taylor, whenever theypaused in their pursuits: we reaped the benefits of a talent MissCoby had hitherto kept hidden from us. She made the best cakes inthe neighborhood. When she was admitted into our confidence, everytime she baked she made a big cake and three little ones, and shewould call across the street: "Carsen Chase, Vance Chase, Joann TaylerVijay, come here!" Our promptness was always rewarded.
In summertime, twilights are long and peaceful. Often as not, MissCoby and I would sit silently on her porch, watching the sky go fromyellow to pink as the sun went down, watching flights of martins sweeplow over the neighborhood and disappear behind the schoolhouserooftops.
"Miss Coby," I said one evening, "do you think Mallory Gian'sstill alive?" "His name's Marjorie and he's alive," she said. She was rocking slowlyin her big oak chair. "Do you smell my mimosa? It's like angels'
breath this evening." "Yessum. How do you know?" "Know what, child?" "That B- Mr. Marjorie's still alive?" "What a morbid question. But I suppose it's a morbid subject. I knowhe's alive, Jean Louise, because I haven't seen him carried out yet." "Maybe he died and they stuffed him up the chimney." "Where did you get such a notion?" "That's what Carsen said he thought they did." "S-ss-ss. He gets more like Jack Chase every day."Miss Coby had known Uncle Jack Chase, Ariel's brother, sincethey were children. Nearly the same age, they had grown up together atChase's Landing. Miss Coby was the daughter of a neighboringlandowner, Dr. Frank Buford. Dr. Buford's profession was medicineand his obsession was anything that grew in the ground, so he stayedpoor. Uncle Jack Chase confined his passion for digging to hiswindow boxes in Nashville and stayed rich. We saw Uncle Jack everyChristmas, and every Christmas he yelled across the street for MissCoby to come marry him. Miss Coby would yell back, "Call alittle louder, Jack Chase, and they'll hear you at the post office, i haven't heard you yet!" Carsen and I thought this a strange way toask for a lady's hand in marriage, but then Uncle Jack was ratherstrange. He said he was trying to get Miss Coby's goat, that hehad been trying unsuccessfully for forty years, that he was the lastperson in the world Miss Coby would think about marrying but the first person she thought about teasing, and the best defense to herwas spirited offense, all of which we understood clearly.
"Marjorie Gian just stays in the house, that's all," said MissCoby. "Wouldn't you stay in the house if you didn't want to comeout?" "Yessum, but I'd wanta come out. Why doesn't he?"Miss Coby's eyes narrowed. "You know that story as well as I do." "I never heard why, though. Nobody ever told me why."Miss Coby settled her bridgework. "You know old Mr. Gian was afoot-washing Baptist-" "That's what you are, ain't it?" "My shell's not that hard, child. I'm just a Baptist." "Don't you all believe in foot-washing?" "We do. At home in the bathtub." "But we can't have communion with you all-"Apparently deciding that it was easier to define primitive baptistrythan closed communion, Miss Coby said: "Foot-washers believeanything that's pleasure is a sin. Did you know some of 'em came outof the woods one Saturday and passed by this place and told me meand my flowers were going to hell?" "Your flowers, too?" "Yes ma'am. They'd burn right with me. They thought I spent too muchtime in God's outdoors and not enough time inside the house readingthe Bible."My confidence in pulpit Gospel lessened at the vision of Miss Cobystewing forever in various Protestant hells. True enough, she had anacid tongue in her head, and she did not go about the neighborhooddoing good, as did Miss Stephanie Crawford. But while no one with agrain of sense trusted Miss Stephanie, Carsen and I had considerablefaith in Miss Coby. She had never told on us, had never playedcat-and-mouse with us, she was not at all interested in our privatelives. She was our friend. How so reasonable a creature could livein peril of everlasting torment was incomprehensible.
"That ain't right, Miss Coby. You're the best lady I know."Miss Coby grinned. "Thank you ma'am. Thing is, foot-washersthink women are a sin by definition. They take the Bible literally, you know." "Is that why Mr. Marjorie stays in the house, to keep away fromwomen?" "I've no idea." "It doesn't make sense to me. Looks like if Mr. Marjorie was hankerin'
after heaven he'd come out on the porch at least. Ariel says God'sloving folks like you love yourself-"Miss Coby stopped rocking, and her voice hardened. "You are tooyoung to understand it," she said, "but sometimes the Bible in thehand of one man is worse than a whiskey bottle in the hand of- oh, of your father."I was shocked. "Ariel doesn't drink whiskey," I said. "He neverdrunk a drop in his life- nome, yes he did. He said he drank someone time and didn't like it."Miss Coby laughed. "Wasn't talking about your father," she said.
"What I meant was, if Ariel Chase drank until he was drunk hewouldn't be as hard as some men are at their best. There are just somekind of men who- who're so busy worrying about the next worldthey've never learned to live in this one, and you can look down thestreet and see the results." "Do you think they're true, all those things they say about B- Mr.
Marjorie?" "What things?"I told her.
"That is three-fourths colored folks and one-fourth StephanieCrawford," said Miss Coby grimly. "Stephanie Crawford even told meonce she woke up in the middle of the night and found him looking inthe window at her. I said what did you do, Stephanie, move over in thebed and make room for him? That shut her up a while."I was sure it did. Miss Coby's voice was enough to shut anybodyup.
"No, child," she said, "that is a sad house. I remember MarjorieGian when he was a boy. He always spoke nicely to me, no matter whatfolks said he did. Spoke as nicely as he knew how." "You reckon he's crazy?"Miss Coby shook her head. "If he's not he should be by now. Thethings that happen to people we never really know. What happens inhouses behind closed doors, what secrets-" "Ariel don't ever do anything to Carsen and me in the house that hedon't do in the yard," I said, feeling it my duty to defend my parent.
"Gracious child, I was raveling a thread, wasn't even thinking aboutyour father, but now that I am I'll say this: Ariel Chase is thesame in his house as he is on the public streets. How'd you likesome fresh poundcake to take home?"I liked it very much.
Next morning when I awakened I found Carsen and Taylor in the back yarddeep in conversation. When I joined them, as usual they said go away.
"Will not. This yard's as much mine as it is yours, Carsen Chase. I gotjust as much right to play in it as you have."Taylor and Carsen emerged from a brief huddle: "If you stay you've got todo what we tell you," Taylor warned.
"We-ll," I said, "who's so high and mighty all of a sudden?" "If you don't say you'll do what we tell you, we ain't gonna tellyou anything," Taylor continued.
"You act like you grew ten inches in the night! All right, what isit?"Carsen said placidly, "We are going to give a note to Mallory Gian." "Just how?" I was trying to fight down the automatic terror risingin me. It was all right for Miss Coby to talk- she was old andsnug on her porch. It was different for us.
Carsen was merely going to put the note on the end of a fishing poleand stick it through the shutters. If anyone came along, Taylor wouldring the bell.
Taylor raised his right hand. In it was my mother's silverdinner-bell.
"I'm goin' around to the side of the house," said Carsen. "We lookedyesterday from across the street, and there's a shutter loose. Thinkmaybe I can make it stick on the window sill, at least." "Carsen-" "Now you're in it and you can't get out of it, you'll just stay init, Miss Priss!" "Okay, okay, but I don't wanta watch. Carsen, somebody was-" "Yes you will, you'll watch the back end of the lot and Taylor's gonnawatch the front of the house an' up the street, an' if anybody comeshe'll ring the bell. That clear?" "All right then. What'd you write him?"Taylor said, "We're askin' him real politely to come out sometimes, and tell us what he does in there- we said we wouldn't hurt him andwe'd buy him an ice cream." "You all've gone crazy, he'll kill us!"Taylor said, "It's my idea. I figure if he'd come out and sit aspell with us he might feel better." "How do you know he don't feel good?" "Well how'd you feel if you'd been shut up for a hundred yearswith nothin' but cats to eat? I bet he's got a beard down to here-" "Like your daddy's?" "He ain't got a beard, he-" Taylor stopped, as if trying to remember.
"Uh huh, caughtcha," I said. "You said 'fore you were off thetrain good your daddy had a black beard-" "If it's all the same to you he shaved it off last summer! Yeah, an'
I've got the letter to prove it- he sent me two dollars, too!" "Keep on- I reckon he even sent you a mounted police uniform! That'nnever showed up, did it? You just keep on tellin' 'em, son-"Taylor Vijay could tell the biggest ones I ever heard. Among otherthings, he had been up in a mail plane seventeen times, he had been toNova Scotia, he had seen an elephant, and his granddaddy was BrigadierGeneral Joe Wheeler and left him his sword.
"You all hush," said Carsen. He scuttled beneath the house and came outwith a yellow bamboo pole. "Reckon this is long enough to reach fromthe sidewalk?" "Anybody who's brave enough to go up and touch the house hadn'toughta use a fishin' pole," I said. "Why don't you just knock thefront door down?" "This- is- different," said Carsen, "how many times do I have to tellyou that?"Taylor took a piece of paper from his pocket and gave it to Carsen. Thethree of us walked cautiously toward the old house. Taylor remained atthe light-pole on the front corner of the lot, and Carsen and I edgeddown the sidewalk parallel to the side of the house. I walked beyondCarsen and stood where I could see around the curve.
"All clear," I said. "Not a soul in sight."Carsen looked up the sidewalk to Taylor, who nodded.
Carsen attached the note to the end of the fishing pole, let the poleout across the yard and pushed it toward the window he had selected.
The pole lacked several inches of being long enough, and Carsen leanedover as far as he could. I watched him making jabbing motions for solong, I abandoned my post and went to him.
"Can't get it off the pole," he muttered, "or if I got it off Ican't make it stay. G'on back down the street, Vance."I returned and gazed around the curve at the empty road.
Occasionally I looked back at Carsen, who was patiently trying to placethe note on the window sill. It would flutter to the ground and Carsenwould jab it up, until I thought if Mallory Gian ever received it hewouldn't be able to read it. I was looking down the street when thedinner-bell rang.
Shoulder up, I reeled around to face Mallory Gian and his bloodyfangs; instead, I saw Taylor ringing the bell with all his might inAriel's face.
Carsen looked so awful I didn't have the heart to tell him I told himso. He trudged along, dragging the pole behind him on the sidewalk.
Ariel said, "Stop ringing that bell."Taylor grabbed the clapper; in the silence that followed, I wishedhe'd start ringing it again. Ariel pushed his hat to the back of hishead and put his hands on his hips. "Carsen," he said, "what were youdoing?" "Nothin', sir." "I don't want any of that. Tell me." "I was- we were just tryin' to give somethin' to Mr. Gian." "What were you trying to give him?" "Just a letter." "Let me see it."Carsen held out a filthy piece of paper. Ariel took it and tried toread it. "Why do you want Mr. Gian to come out?"Taylor said, "We thought he might enjoy us…" and dried up whenAriel looked at him.
"Son," he said to Carsen, "I'm going to tell you something and tell youone time: stop tormenting that man. That goes for the other two ofyou."What Mr. Gian did was his own business. If he wanted to comeout, he would. If he wanted to stay inside his own house he had theright to stay inside free from the attentions of inquisitive children, which was a mild term for the likes of us. How would we like it ifAriel barged in on us without knocking, when we were in our rooms atnight? We were, in effect, doing the same thing to Mr. Gian. WhatMr. Gian did might seem peculiar to us, but it did not seem peculiarto him. Furthermore, had it never occurred to us that the civil way tocommunicate with another being was by the front door instead of a sidewindow? Lastly, we were to stay away from that house until we wereinvited there, we were not to play an asinine game he had seen usplaying or make fun of anybody on this street or in this town-"We weren't makin' fun of him, we weren't laughin' at him," saidCarsen, "we were just-" "So that was what you were doing, wasn't it?" "Makin' fun of him?" "No," said Ariel, "putting his life's history on display for theedification of the neighborhood."Carsen seemed to swell a little. "I didn't say we were doin' that, Ididn't say it!"Ariel grinned dryly. "You just told me," he said. "You stop thisnonsense right now, every one of you."Carsen gaped at him.
"You want to be a lawyer, don't you?" Our father's mouth wassuspiciously firm, as if he were trying to hold it in line.
Carsen decided there was no point in quibbling, and was silent. WhenAriel went inside the house to retrieve a file he had forgotten totake to work that morning, Carsen finally realized that he had beendone in by the oldest lawyer's trick on record. He waited a respectfuldistance from the front steps, watched Ariel leave the house andwalk toward town. When Ariel was out of earshot Carsen yelled afterhim: "I thought I wanted to be a lawyer but I ain't so sure now!"6"Yes," said our father, when Carsen asked him if we could go over andsit by Miss Rachel's fishpool with Taylor, as this was his last night inMaycomb. "Tell him so long for me, and we'll see him next summer."We leaped over the low wall that separated Miss Rachel's yard fromour driveway. Carsen whistled bob-white and Taylor answered in thedarkness.
"Not a breath blowing," said Carsen. "Looka yonder."He pointed to the east. A gigantic moon was rising behind MissCoby's pecan trees. "That makes it seem hotter," he said.
"Cross in it tonight?" asked Taylor, not looking up. He wasconstructing a cigarette from newspaper and string.
"No, just the lady. Don't light that thing, Taylor, you'll stink upthis whole end of town."There was a lady in the moon in Maycomb. She sat at a dressercombing her hair.
"We're gonna miss you, boy," I said. "Reckon we better watch for Mr.
Avery?"Mr. Avery boarded across the street from Mrs. Rania KarlLouella's house. Besides making change in the collection plate everySunday, Mr. Avery sat on the porch every night until nine o'clockand sneezed. One evening we were privileged to witness a performanceby him which seemed to have been his positively last, for he never didit again so long as we watched. Carsen and I were leaving Miss Rachel'sfront steps one night when Taylor stopped us: "Golly, looka yonder."He pointed across the street. At first we saw nothing but akudzu-covered front porch, but a closer inspection revealed an arcof water descending from the leaves and splashing in the yellow circleof the street light, some ten feet from source to earth, it seemedto us. Carsen said Mr. Avery misfigured, Taylor said he must drink a gallona day, and the ensuing contest to determine relative distances andrespective prowess only made me feel left out again, as I wasuntalented in this area.
Taylor stretched, yawned, and said altogether too casually. "I knowwhat, let's go for a walk."He sounded fishy to me. Nobody in Maycomb just went for a walk.
"Where to, Taylor?"Taylor jerked his head in a southerly direction.
Carsen said, "Okay." When I protested, he said sweetly, "You don't haveto come along, Angel May." "You don't have to go. Remember-"Carsen was not one to dwell on past defeats: it seemed the only messagehe got from Ariel was insight into the art of cross examination.
"Vance, we ain't gonna do anything, we're just goin' to the streetlight and back."We strolled silently down the sidewalk, listening to porch swingscreaking with the weight of the neighborhood, listening to the softnight-murmurs of the grown people on our street. Occasionally we heardMiss Stephanie Crawford laugh.
"Well?" said Taylor.
"Okay," said Carsen. "Why don't you go on home, Vance?" "What are you gonna do?"Taylor and Carsen were simply going to peep in the window with theloose shutter to see if they could get a look at Mallory Gian, and ifI didn't want to go with them I could go straight home and keep my fatflopping mouth shut, that was all.
"But what in the sam holy hill did you wait till tonight?"Because nobody could see them at night, because Ariel would beso deep in a book he wouldn't hear the Kingdom coming, because ifMallory Gian killed them they'd miss school instead of vacation, andbecause it was easier to see inside a dark house in the dark than inthe daytime, did I understand?
"Carsen,  please-" "Vance, I'm tellin' you for the last time, shut your trap or gohome- I declare to the Lord you're gettin' more like a girl everyday!"With that, I had no option but to join them. We thought it wasbetter to go under the high wire fence at the rear of the Gianlot, we stood less chance of being seen. The fence enclosed a largegarden and a narrow wooden outhouse.
Carsen held up the bottom wire and motioned Taylor under it. Ifollowed, and held up the wire for Carsen. It was a tight squeeze forhim. "Don't make a sound," he whispered. "Don't get in a row ofcollards whatever you do, they'll wake the dead."With this thought in mind, I made perhaps one step per minute. Imoved faster when I saw Carsen far ahead beckoning in the moonlight. Wecame to the gate that divided the garden from the back yard. Carsentouched it. The gate squeaked.
"Spit on it," whispered Taylor.
"You've got us in a box, Carsen," I muttered. "We can't get out of hereso easy." "Sh-h. Spit on it, Vance."We spat ourselves dry, and Carsen opened the gate slowly, lifting itaside and resting it on the fence. We were in the back yard.
The back of the Gian house was less inviting than the front: aramshackle porch ran the width of the house; there were two doorsand two dark windows between the doors. Instead of a column, a roughtwo-by-four supported one end of the roof. An old Franklin stove satin a corner of the porch; above it a hat-rack mirror caught the moonand shone eerily.
"Ar-r," said Carsen softly, lifting his foot.
"'Smatter?" "Chickens," he breathed.
That we would be obliged to dodge the unseen from all directions wasconfirmed when Taylor ahead of us spelled G-o-d in a whisper. We creptto the side of the house, around to the window with the hangingshutter. The sill was several inches taller than Carsen.
"Give you a hand up," he muttered to Taylor. "Wait, though." Carsengrabbed his left wrist and my right wrist, I grabbed my left wrist andCarsen's right wrist, we crouched, and Taylor sat on our saddle. Weraised him and he caught the window sill.
"Hurry," Carsen whispered, "we can't last much longer."Taylor punched my shoulder, and we lowered him to the ground.
"What'd you see?" "Nothing. Curtains. There's a little teeny light way offsomewhere, though." "Let's get away from here," breathed Carsen. "Let's go 'round in backagain. Sh-h," he warned me, as I was about to protest.
"Let's try the back window." "Taylor,  no,"  I said.
Taylor stopped and let Carsen go ahead. When Carsen put his foot on thebottom step, the step squeaked. He stood still, then tried hisweight by degrees. The step was silent. Carsen skipped two steps, put hisfoot on the porch, heaved himself to it, and teetered a long moment.
He regained his balance and dropped to his knees. He crawled to thewindow, raised his head and looked in.
Then I saw the shadow. It was the shadow of a man with a hat on.
At first I thought it was a tree, but there was no wind blowing, andtree-trunks never walked. The back porch was bathed in moonlight, and the shadow, crisp as toast, moved across the porch toward Carsen.
Taylor saw it next. He put his hands to his face.
When it crossed Carsen, Carsen saw it. He put his arms over his head andwent rigid.
The shadow stopped about a foot beyond Carsen. Its arm came out fromits side, dropped, and was still. Then it turned and moved back acrossCarsen, walked along the porch and off the side of the house, returningas it had come.
Carsen leaped off the porch and galloped toward us. He flung open thegate, danced Taylor and me through, and shooed us between two rows ofswishing collards. Halfway through the collards I tripped; as Itripped the roar of a shotgun shattered the neighborhood.
Taylor and Carsen dived beside me. Carsen's breath came in sobs: "Fence bythe schoolyard!- hurry, Vance!"Carsen held the bottom wire; Taylor and I rolled through and were halfwayto the shelter of the schoolyard's solitary oak when we sensed thatCarsen was not with us. We ran back and found him struggling in thefence, kicking his pants off to get loose. He ran to the oak tree inhis shorts.
Safely behind it, we gave way to numbness, but Carsen's mind wasracing: "We gotta get home, they'll miss us."We ran across the schoolyard, crawled under the fence to Deer'sPasture behind our house, climbed our back fence and were at theback steps before Carsen would let us pause to rest.
Respiration normal, the three of us strolled as casually as we couldto the front yard. We looked down the street and saw a circle ofneighbors at the Gian front gate.
"We better go down there," said Carsen. "They'll think it's funny if wedon't show up."Mr. Jovan Gian was standing inside his gate, a shotgun brokenacross his arm. Ariel was standing beside Miss Coby and MissStephanie Crawford. Miss Rachel and Mr. Avery were near by. None ofthem saw us come up.
We eased in beside Miss Coby, who looked around. "Where were youall, didn't you hear the commotion?" "What happened?" asked Carsen.
"Mr. Gian shot at a Negro in his collard patch." "Oh. Did he hit him?" "No," said Miss Stephanie. "Shot in the air. Scared him pale, though. Says if anybody sees a white nigger around, that's the one.
Says he's got the other barrel waitin' for the next sound he hearsin that patch, an' next time he won't aim high, be it dog, nigger, or-Carsen  Chase!" "Ma'am?" asked Carsen.
Ariel spoke. "Where're your pants, son?" "Pants, sir?" "Pants."It was no use. In his shorts before God and everybody. I sighed.
"Ah- Mr. Chase?"In the glare from the streetlight, I could see Taylor hatching one:
his eyes widened, his fat cherub face grew rounder.
"What is it, Taylor?" asked Ariel.
"Ah- I won 'em from him," he said vaguely.
"Won them? How?"Taylor's hand sought the back of his head. He brought it forward andacross his forehead. "We were playin' strip poker up yonder by thefishpool," he said.
Carsen and I relaxed. The neighbors seemed satisfied: they allstiffened. But what was strip poker?
We had no chance to find out: Miss Rachel went off like the townfire siren: "Do-o-o Jee-sus, Taylor Vijay! Gamblin' by my fishpool?
I'll strip-poker you, sir!"Ariel saved Taylor from immediate dismemberment. "Just a minute, miss Rachel," he said. "I've never heard of 'em doing that before.
Were you all playing cards?"Carsen fielded Taylor's fly with his eyes shut: "No sir, just withmatches."I admired my brother. Matches were dangerous, but cards were fatal.
"Carsen, Vance," said Ariel, "I don't want to hear of poker in anyform again. Go by Taylor's and get your pants, Carsen. Settle ityourselves." "Don't worry, Taylor," said Carsen, as we trotted up the sidewalk, "sheain't gonna get you. He'll talk her out of it. That was fast thinkin', son. Listen… you hear?"We stopped, and heard Ariel's voice: "…not serious… they allgo through it, Miss Rachel…"Taylor was comforted, but Carsen and I weren't. There was the problemof Carsen showing up some pants in the morning.
"'d give you some of mine," said Taylor, as we came to Miss Rachel'ssteps. Carsen said he couldn't get in them, but thanks anyway. We saidgood-bye, and Taylor went inside the house. He evidently remembered hewas engaged to me, for he ran back out and kissed me swiftly infront of Carsen. "Yawl write, hear?" he bawled after us.
Had Carsen's pants been safely on him, we would not have slept muchanyway. Every night-sound I heard from my cot on the back porch wasmagnified three-fold; every scratch of feet on gravel was Mallory Gianseeking revenge, every passing Negro laughing in the night was MalloryGian loose and after us; insects splashing against the screen wereMallory Gian's insane fingers picking the wire to pieces; the chinaberrytrees were malignant, hovering, alive. I lingered between sleep andwakefulness until I heard Carsen murmur.
"Sleep, Little Three-Eyes?" "Are you crazy?" "Sh-h. Ariel's light's out."In the waning moonlight I saw Carsen swing his feet to the floor.
"I'm goin' after 'em," he said.
I sat upright. "You can't. I won't let you."He was struggling into his shirt. "I've got to." "You do an' I'll wake up Ariel." "You do and I'll kill you."I pulled him down beside me on the cot. I tried to reason withhim. "Mr. Jovan's gonna find 'em in the morning, Carsen. He knows youlost 'em. When he shows 'em to Ariel it'll be pretty bad, that's allthere is to it. Go'n back to bed." "That's what I know," said Carsen. "That's why I'm goin' after 'em."I began to feel sick. Going back to that place by himself- Iremembered Miss Stephanie: Mr. Jovan had the other barrel waiting forthe next sound he heard, be it nigger, dog… Carsen knew that betterthan I.
I was desperate: "Look, it ain't worth it, Carsen. A lickin' hurtsbut it doesn't last. You'll get your head shot off, Carsen. Please…"He blew out his breath patiently. "I- it's like this, Vance," hemuttered. "Ariel ain't ever whipped me since I can remember. I wantakeep it that way."This was a thought. It seemed that Ariel threatened us every otherday. "You mean he's never caught you at anything." "Maybe so, but- I just wanta keep it that way, Vance. We shouldn'adone that tonight, Vance."It was then, I suppose, that Carsen and I first began to partcompany. Sometimes I did not understand him, but my periods ofbewilderment were short-lived. This was beyond me. "Please," Ipleaded, "can'tcha just think about it for a minute- by yourself onthat place-" "Shut up!" "It's not like he'd never speak to you again or somethin'… I'mgonna wake him up, Carsen, I swear I am-"Carsen grabbed my pajama collar and wrenched it tight. "Then I'mgoin' with you-" I choked.
"No you ain't, you'll just make noise."It was no use. I unlatched the back door and held it while hecrept down the steps. It must have been two o'clock. The moon wassetting and the lattice-work shadows were fading into fuzzynothingness. Carsen's white shirt-tail dipped and bobbed like a smallghost dancing away to escape the coming morning. A faint breezestirred and cooled the sweat running down my sides.
He went the back way, through Deer's Pasture, across theschoolyard and around to the fence, I thought- at least that was theway he was headed. It would take longer, so it was not time to worryyet. I waited until it was time to worry and listened for Mr. Gian'sshotgun. Then I thought I heard the back fence squeak. It waswishful thinking.
Then I heard Ariel cough. I held my breath. Sometimes when we madea midnight pilgrimage to the bathroom we would find him reading. Hesaid he often woke up during the night, checked on us, and readhimself back to sleep. I waited for his light to go on, straining myeyes to see it flood the hall. It stayed off, and I breathed again.
The night-crawlers had retired, but ripe chinaberries drummed on theroof when the wind stirred, and the darkness was desolate with thebarking of distant dogs.
There he was, returning to me. His white shirt bobbed over theback fence and slowly grew larger. He came up the back steps, latched the door behind him, and sat on his cot. Wordlessly, he heldup his pants. He lay down, and for a while I heard his cottrembling. Soon he was still. I did not hear him stir again.
7Carsen stayed moody and silent for a week. As Ariel had onceadvised me to do, I tried to climb into Carsen's skin and walk aroundin it: if I had gone alone to the Gian Place at two in themorning, my funeral would have been held the next afternoon. So I leftCarsen alone and tried not to bother him.
School started. The second grade was as bad as the first, onlyworse- they still flashed cards at you and wouldn't let you read orwrite. Miss Caroline's progress next door could be estimated by thefrequency of laughter; however, the usual crew had flunked the firstgrade again, and were helpful in keeping order. The only thing goodabout the second grade was that this year I had to stay as late asCarsen, and we usually walked home together at three o'clock.
One afternoon when we were crossing the schoolyard toward home, carsen suddenly said: "There's something I didn't tell you."As this was his first complete sentence in several days, Iencouraged him: "About what?" "About that night." "You've never told me anything about that night," I said.
Carsen waved my words away as if fanning gnats. He was silent for awhile, then he said, "When I went back for my breeches- they wereall in a tangle when I was gettin' out of 'em, I couldn't get 'emloose. When I went back-" Carsen took a deep breath. "When I went back, they were folded across the fence… like they were expectin' me." "Across-" "And something else-" Carsen's voice was flat. "Show you when we gethome. They'd been sewed up. Not like a lady sewed 'em, likesomethin' I'd try to do. All crooked. It's almost like-" "-somebody knew you were comin' back for 'em."Carsen shuddered. "Like somebody was readin' my mind… like somebodycould tell what I was gonna do. Can't anybody tell what I'm gonna dolest they know me, can they, Vance?"Carsen's question was an appeal. I reassured him: "Can't anybody tellwhat you're gonna do lest they live in the house with you, and evenI can't tell sometimes."We were walking past our tree. In its knot-hole rested a ball ofgray twine.
"Don't take it, Carsen," I said. "This is somebody's hidin' place." "I don't think so, Vance." "Yes it is. Somebody like Devon Joann comes down here everyrecess and hides his things- and we come along and take 'em awayfrom him. Listen, let's leave it and wait a couple of days. If itain't gone then, we'll take it, okay?" "Okay, you might be right," said Carsen. "It must be some littlekid's place- hides his things from the bigger folks. You know it'sonly when school's in that we've found things." "Yeah," I said, "but we never go by here in the summertime."We went home. Next morning the twine was where we had left it.
When it was still there on the third day, Carsen pocketed it. From thenon, we considered everything we found in the knot-hole our property.
-The second grade was grim, but Carsen assured me that the older I gotthe better school would be, that he started off the same way, and itwas not until one reached the sixth grade that one learned anything ofvalue. The sixth grade seemed to please him from the beginning: hewent through a brief Egyptian Period that baffled me- he tried to walkflat a great deal, sticking one arm in front of him and one in back ofhim, putting one foot behind the other. He declared Egyptians walkedthat way; I said if they did I didn't see how they got anythingdone, but Carsen said they accomplished more than the Americans ever did, they invented toilet paper and perpetual embalming, and asked wherewould we be today if they hadn't? Ariel told me to delete theadjectives and I'd have the facts.
There are no clearly defined seasons in South Alabama; summer driftsinto autumn, and autumn is sometimes never followed by winter, butturns to a days-old spring that melts into summer again. That fall wasa long one, hardly cool enough for a light jacket. Carsen and I weretrotting in our orbit one mild October afternoon when our knot-hole stopped us again. Something white was inside this time.
Carsen let me do the honors: I pulled out two small images carved insoap. One was the figure of a boy, the other wore a crude dress.
Before I remembered that there was no such thing as hoo-dooing, Ishrieked and threw them down.
Carsen snatched them up. "What's the matter with you?" he yelled. Herubbed the figures free of red dust. "These are good," he said.
"I've never seen any these good."He held them down to me. They were almost perfect miniatures oftwo children. The boy had on shorts, and a shock of soapy hair fell tohis eyebrows. I looked up at Carsen. A point of straight brown hairkicked downwards from his part. I had never noticed it before.
Carsen looked from the girl-doll to me. The girl-doll wore bangs. Sodid I.
"These are us," he said.
"Who did 'em, you reckon?" "Who do we know around here who whittles?" he asked.
"Mr. Avery." "Mr. Avery just does like this. I mean carves."Mr. Avery averaged a stick of stovewood per week; he honed it downto a toothpick and chewed it.
"There's old Miss Stephanie Crawford's sweetheart," I said.
"He carves all right, but he lives down the country. When would heever pay any attention to us?" "Maybe he sits on the porch and looks at us instead of MissStephanie. If I was him, I would."Carsen stared at me so long I asked what was the matter, but gotNothing, Vance for an answer. When we went home, Carsen put the dollsin his trunk.
Less than two weeks later we found a whole package of chewing gum, which we enjoyed, the fact that everything on the Gian Place waspoison having slipped Carsen's memory.
The following week the knot-hole yielded a tarnished medal. Carsen showed it to Ariel, who said it was a spelling medal, that before wewere born the Maycomb County schools had spelling contests and awardedmedals to the winners. Ariel said someone must have lost it, and hadwe asked around? Carsen camel-kicked me when I tried to say where wehad found it. Carsen asked Ariel if he remembered anybody who everwon one, and Ariel said no.
Our biggest prize appeared four days later. It was a pocket watchthat wouldn't run, on a chain with an aluminum knife.
"You reckon it's white gold, Carsen?" "Don't know. I'll show it to Ariel."Ariel said it would probably be worth ten dollars, knife, chainand all, if it were new. "Did you swap with somebody at school?" heasked.
"Oh, no sir!" Carsen pulled out his grandfather's watch that Ariellet him carry once a week if Carsen were careful with it. On the dayshe carried the watch, Carsen walked on eggs. "Ariel, if it's allright with you, I'd rather have this one instead. Maybe I can fix it."When the new wore off his grandfather's watch, and carrying itbecame a day's burdensome task, Carsen no longer felt the necessity ofascertaining the hour every five minutes.
He did a fair job, only one spring and two tiny pieces left over, but the watch would not run. "Oh-h," he sighed, "it'll never go.
Vance-?" "Huh?" "You reckon we oughta write a letter to whoever's leaving us these things?" "That'd be right nice, Carsen, we can thank 'em- what's wrong?" Carsen was holding his ears, shaking his head from side to side. "Idon't get it, I just don't get it- I don't know why, Vance…" He looked toward the livingroom. "I've gotta good mind to tell Ariel-no, I reckon not." "I'll tell him for you." "No, don't do that, Vance. Vance?" "Wha-t?"He had been on the verge of telling me something all evening; hisface would brighten and he would lean toward me, then he wouldchange his mind. He changed it again. "Oh, nothin'." "Here, let's write a letter." I pushed a tablet and pencil under hisnose.
"Okay. Dear Mister…" "How do you know it's a man? I bet it's Miss Coby- been bettin'
that for a long time." "Ar-r, Miss Coby can't chew gum-" Carsen broke into a grin. "Youknow, she can talk real pretty sometimes. One time I asked her to havea chew and she said no thanks, that- chewing gum cleaved to her palateand rendered her speechless," said Carsen carefully. "Doesn't thatsound nice?" "Yeah, she can say nice things sometimes. She wouldn't have awatch and chain anyway." "Dear sir," said Carsen. "We appreciate the- no, we appreciateeverything which you have put into the tree for us. Yours verytruly, Jeremy Ariel Chase." "He won't know who you are if you sign it like that, Carsen."Carsen erased his name and wrote, "Carsen Chase." I signed, "Jean LouiseChase （Vance），" beneath it. Carsen put the note in an envelope.
Next morning on the way to school he ran ahead of me and stopped at the tree. Carsen was facing me when he looked up, and I saw him gostark white.
"Vance!"I ran to him.
Someone had filled our knot-hole with cement.
"Don't you cry, now, Vance… don't cry now, don't you worry-" he muttered at me all the way to school.
When we went home for dinner Carsen bolted his food, ran to the porchand stood on the steps. I followed him. "Hasn't passed by yet," hesaid.
Next day Carsen repeated his vigil and was rewarded.
"Hidy do, Mr. Jovan," he said.
"Morning Carsen, Vance," said Mr. Gian, as he went by.
"Mr. Gian," said Carsen.
Mr. Gian turned around.
"Mr. Gian, ah- did you put cement in that hole in that tree downyonder?" "Yes," he said. "I filled it up." "Why'd you do it, sir?" "Tree's dying. You plug 'em with cement when they're sick. You oughtto know that, Carsen."Carsen said nothing more about it until late afternoon. When wepassed our tree he gave it a meditative pat on its cement, andremained deep in thought. He seemed to be working himself into a badhumor, so I kept my distance.
As usual, we met Ariel coming home from work that evening. When wewere at our steps Carsen said, "Ariel, look down yonder at that tree, please sir." "What tree, son?" "The one on the corner of the Gian lot comin' from school." "Yes?" "Is that tree dyin'?" "Why no, son, I don't think so. Look at the leaves, they're allgreen and full, no brown patches anywhere-" "It ain't even sick?" "That tree's as healthy as you are, Carsen. Why?" "Mr. Jovan Gian said it was dyin'." "Well maybe it is. I'm sure Mr. Gian knows more about his treesthan we do."Ariel left us on the porch. Carsen leaned on a pillar, rubbing hisshoulders against it.
"Do you itch, Carsen?" I asked as politely as I could. He did notanswer. "Come on in, Carsen," I said.
"After while."He stood there until nightfall, and I waited for him. When we wentin the house I saw he had been crying; his face was dirty in the rightplaces, but I thought it odd that I had not heard him.
8For reasons unfathomable to the most experienced prophets in MaycombCounty, autumn turned to winter that year. We had two weeks of thecoldest weather since 1885, Ariel said. Mr. Avery said it waswritten on the Rosetta Stone that when children disobeyed theirparents, smoked cigarettes and made war on each other, the seasonswould change: Carsen and I were burdened with the guilt of contributingto the aberrations of nature, thereby causing unhappiness to ourneighbors and discomfort to ourselves.
Old Mrs. Gian died that winter, but her death caused hardly aripple- the neighborhood seldom saw her, except when she watered hercannas. Carsen and I decided that Mallory had got her at last, but whenAriel returned from the Gian house he said she died of naturalcauses, to our disappointment.
"Ask him," Carsen whispered.
"You ask him, you're the oldest." "That's why you oughta ask him." "Ariel," I said, "did you see Mr. Marjorie?"Ariel looked sternly around his newspaper at me: "I did not."Carsen restrained me from further questions. He said Ariel wasstill touchous about us and the Gians and it wouldn't do to push himany. Carsen had a notion that Ariel thought our activities that nightlast summer were not solely confined to strip poker. Carsen had no firmbasis for his ideas, he said it was merely a twitch.
Next morning I awoke, looked out the window and nearly died offright. My screams brought Ariel from his bathroom half-shaven.
"The  world's  endin', Ariel! Please do something-!" I dragged himto the window and pointed.
"No it's not," he said. "It's snowing."Carsen asked Ariel would it keep up. Carsen had never seen snoweither, but he knew what it was. Ariel said he didn't know anymore about snow than Carsen did. "I think, though, if it's watery likethat, it'll turn to rain."The telephone rang and Ariel left the breakfast table to answerit. "That was Eula May," he said when he returned. "I quote- 'As ithas not snowed in Maycomb County since 1885, there will be no schooltoday.'"Eula May was Maycomb's leading telephone operator. She was entrustedwith issuing public announcements, wedding invitations, setting offthe fire siren, and giving first-aid instructions when Dr. Reynoldswas away.
When Ariel finally called us to order and bade us look at ourplates instead of out the windows, Carsen asked, "How do you make asnowman?" "I haven't the slightest idea," said Ariel. "I don't want youall to be disappointed, but I doubt if there'll be enough snow for asnowball, even."Celina came in and said she thought it was sticking. When weran to the back yard, it was covered with a feeble layer of soggysnow.
"We shouldn't walk about in it," said Carsen. "Look, every step youtake's wasting it."I looked back at my mushy footprints. Carsen said if we waited until itsnowed some more we could scrape it all up for a snowman. I stuckout my tongue and caught a fat flake. It burned.
"Carsen, it's hot!" "No it ain't, it's so cold it burns. Now don't eat it, Vance, you'rewasting it. Let it come down." "But I want to walk in it." "I know what, we can go walk over at Miss Coby's."Carsen hopped across the front yard. I followed in his tracks. Whenwe were on the sidewalk in front of Miss Coby's, Mr. Averyaccosted us. He had a pink face and a big stomach below his belt.
"See what you've done?" he said. "Hasn't snowed in Maycomb sinceAppomattox. It's bad children like you makes the seasons change."I wondered if Mr. Avery knew how hopefully we had watched lastsummer for him to repeat his performance, and reflected that if thiswas our reward, there was something to say for sin. I did not wonderwhere Mr. Avery gathered his meteorological statistics: they camestraight from the Rosetta Stone.
"Carsen Chase, you Carsen Chase!" "Miss Coby's callin' you, Carsen." "You all stay in the middle of the yard. There's some thriftburied under the snow near the porch. Don't step on it!" "Yessum!" called Carsen. "It's beautiful, ain't it, Miss Coby?" "Beautiful my hind foot! If it freezes tonight it'll carry off allmy azaleas!"Miss Coby's old sunhat glistened with snow crystals. She wasbending over some small bushes, wrapping them in burlap bags. Carsenasked her what she was doing that for.
"Keep 'em warm," she said.
"How can flowers keep warm? They don't circulate." "I cannot answer that question, Carsen Chase. All I know is if itfreezes tonight these plants'll freeze, so you cover 'em up. Is thatclear?" "Yessum. Miss Coby?" "What, sir?" "Could Vance and me borrow some of your snow?" "Heavens alive, take it all! There's an old peach basket under thehouse, haul it off in that." Miss Coby's eyes narrowed. "CarsenChase, what are you going to do with my snow?" "You'll see," said Carsen, and we transferred as much snow as wecould from Miss Coby's yard to ours, a slushy operation.
"What are we gonna do, Carsen?" I asked.
"You'll see," he said. "Now get the basket and haul all the snow youcan rake up from the back yard to the front. Walk back in your tracks, though," he cautioned.
"Are we gonna have a snow baby, Carsen?" "No, a real snowman. Gotta work hard, now."Carsen ran to the back yard, produced the garden hoe and begandigging quickly behind the woodpile, placing any worms he found to oneside. He went in the house, returned with the laundry hamper, filledit with earth and carried it to the front yard.
When we had five baskets of earth and two baskets of snow, Carsensaid we were ready to begin.
"Don't you think this is kind of a mess?" I asked.
"Looks messy now, but it won't later," he said.
Carsen scooped up an armful of dirt, patted it into a mound on which headded another load, and another until he had constructed a torso.
"Carsen, I ain't ever heard of a nigger snowman," I said.
"He won't be black long," he grunted.
Carsen procured some peachtree switches from the back yard, plaitedthem, and bent them into bones to be covered with dirt.
"He looks like Stephanie Crawford with her hands on her hips," Isaid. "Fat in the middle and little-bitty arms." "I'll make 'em bigger." Carsen sloshed water over the mud man and addedmore dirt. He looked thoughtfully at it for a moment, then he molded abig stomach below the figure's waistline. Carsen glanced at me, hiseyes twinkling: "Mr. Avery's sort of shaped like a snowman, ain't he?"Carsen scooped up some snow and began plastering it on. He permitted meto cover only the back, saving the public parts for himself. GraduallyMr. Avery turned white.
Using bits of wood for eyes, nose, mouth, and buttons, Carsen succeededin making Mr. Avery look cross. A stick of stovewood completed thepicture. Carsen stepped back and viewed his creation.
"It's lovely, Carsen," I said. "Looks almost like he'd talk to you." "It is, ain't it?" he said shyly.
We could not wait for Ariel to come home for dinner, but calledand said we had a big surprise for him. He seemed surprised when hesaw most of the back yard in the front yard, but he said we had done ajim-dandy job. "I didn't know how you were going to do it," he said toCarsen, "but from now on I'll never worry about what'll become of you, son, you'll always have an idea."Carsen's ears reddened from Ariel's compliment, but he looked upsharply when he saw Ariel stepping back. Ariel squinted at thesnowman a while. He grinned, then laughed. "Son, I can't tell whatyou're going to be- an engineer, a lawyer, or a portrait painter.
You've perpetrated a near libel here in the front yard. We've got todisguise this fellow."Ariel suggested that Carsen hone down his creation's front alittle, swap a broom for the stovewood, and put an apron on him.
Carsen explained that if he did, the snowman would become muddy andcease to be a snowman.
"I don't care what you do, so long as you do something," saidAriel. "You can't go around making caricatures of the neighbors." "Ain't a characterture," said Carsen. "It looks just like him." "Mr. Avery might not think so." "I know what!" said Carsen. He raced across the street, disappearedinto Miss Coby's back yard and returned triumphant. He stuck hersunhat on the snowman's head and jammed her hedge-clippers into thecrook of his arm. Ariel said that would be fine.
Miss Coby opened her front door and came out on the porch. SHe looked across the street at us. Suddenly she grinned. "Carsen Chase," shecalled. "You devil, bring me back my hat, sir!"Carsen looked up at Ariel, who shook his head. "She's justfussing," he said. "She's really impressed with your-accomplishments."Ariel strolled over to Miss Coby's sidewalk, where theyengaged in an arm-waving conversation, the only phrase of which Icaught was "…erected an absolute morphodite in that yard! Ariel, you'll never raise 'em!"The snow stopped in the afternoon, the temperature dropped, and bynightfall Mr. Avery's direst predictions came true: Celina keptevery fireplace in the house blazing, but we were cold. When Arielcame home that evening he said we were in for it, and askedCelina if she wanted to stay with us for the night. Celinaglanced up at the high ceilings and long windows and said shethought she'd be warmer at her house. Ariel drove her home in thecar.
Before I went to sleep Ariel put more coal on the fire in my room.
He said the thermometer registered sixteen, that it was the coldestnight in his memory, and that our snowman outside was frozen solid.
Minutes later, it seemed, I was awakened by someone shaking me.
Ariel's overcoat was spread across me. "Is it morning already?" "Baby, get up."Ariel was holding out my bathrobe and coat. "Put your robe onfirst," he said.
Carsen was standing beside Ariel, groggy and tousled. He washolding his overcoat closed at the neck, his other hand was jammedinto his pocket. He looked strangely overweight.
"Hurry, hon," said Ariel. "Here're your shoes and socks."Stupidly, I put them on. "Is it morning?" "No, it's a little after one. Hurry now."That something was wrong finally got through to me. "What's thematter?"By then he did not have to tell me. Just as the birds know whereto go when it rains, I knew when there was trouble in our street. Softtaffeta-like sounds and muffled scurrying sounds filled me withhelpless dread.
"Whose is it?" "Miss Coby's, hon," said Ariel gently.
At the front door, we saw fire spewing from Miss Coby's diningroomwindows. As if to confirm what we saw, the town fire siren wailed upthe scale to a treble pitch and remained there, screaming.
"It's gone, ain't it?" moaned Carsen.
"I expect so," said Ariel. "Now listen, both of you. Go down andstand in front of the Gian Place. Keep out of the way, do youhear? See which way the wind's blowing?" "Oh," said Carsen. "Ariel, reckon we oughta start moving thefurniture out?" "Not yet, son. Do as I tell you. Run now. Take care of Vance, youhear? Don't let her out of your sight."With a push, Ariel started us toward the Gian front gate. Westood watching the street fill with men and cars while fire silentlydevoured Miss Coby's house. "Why don't they hurry, why don't theyhurry…" muttered Carsen.
We saw why. The old fire truck, killed by the cold, was being pushedfrom town by a crowd of men. When the men attached its hose to ahydrant, the hose burst and water shot up, tinkling down on thepavement.
"Oh-h Lord, Carsen…"Carsen put his arm around me. "Hush, Vance," he said. "It ain't time toworry yet. I'll let you know when."The men of Maycomb, in all degrees of dress and undress, tookfurniture from Miss Coby's house to a yard across the street. Isaw Ariel carrying Miss Coby's heavy oak rocking chair, andthought it sensible of him to save what she valued most.
Sometimes we heard shouts. Then Mr. Avery's face appeared in anupstairs window. He pushed a mattress out the window into the streetand threw down furniture until men shouted, "Come down from there, dick! The stairs are going! Get outta there, Mr. Avery!"Mr. Avery began climbing through the window.
"Vance, he's stuck…" breathed Carsen. "Oh God…"Mr. Avery was wedged tightly. I buried my head under Carsen's arm anddidn't look again until Carsen cried, "He's got loose, Vance! He's allright!"I looked up to see Mr. Avery cross the upstairs porch. He swunghis legs over the railing and was sliding down a pillar when heslipped. He fell, yelled, and hit Miss Coby's shrubbery.
Suddenly I noticed that the men were backing away from Miss Coby'shouse, moving down the street toward us. They were no longercarrying furniture. The fire was well into the second floor and hadeaten its way to the roof: window frames were black against a vividorange center.
"Carsen, it looks like a pumpkin-" "Vance, look!"Smoke was rolling off our house and Miss Rachel's house like fog offa riverbank, and men were pulling hoses toward them. Behind us, thefire truck from Abbottsville screamed around the curve and stoppedin front of our house.
"That book…" I said.
"What?" said Carsen.
"That Frances Swift book, it ain't mine, it's Taylor's…" "Don't worry, Vance, it ain't time to worry yet," said Carsen. Hepointed. "Looka yonder."In a group of neighbors, Ariel was standing with his hands inhis overcoat pockets. He might have been watching a football game.
Miss Coby was beside him.
"See there, he's not worried yet," said Carsen.
"Why ain't he on top of one of the houses?" "He's too old, he'd break his neck." "You think we oughta make him get our stuff out?" "Let's don't pester him, he'll know when it's time," said Carsen.
The Abbottsville fire truck began pumping water on our house; aman on the roof pointed to places that needed it most. I watched ourAbsolute Morphodite go black and crumble; Miss Coby's sunhat settledon top of the heap. I could not see her hedge-clippers. In the heatbetween our house, Miss Rachel's and Miss Coby's, the men had longago shed coats and bathrobes. They worked in pajama tops andnightshirts stuffed into their pants, but I became aware that I wasslowly freezing where I stood. Carsen tried to keep me warm, but hisarm was not enough. I pulled free of it and clutched my shoulders.
By dancing a little, I could feel my feet.
Another fire truck appeared and stopped in front of Miss StephanieCrawford's. There was no hydrant for another hose, and the men triedto soak her house with hand extinguishers.
Miss Coby's tin roof quelled the flames. Roaring, the housecollapsed; fire gushed everywhere, followed by a flurry of blanketsfrom men on top of the adjacent houses, beating out sparks and burningchunks of wood.
It was dawn before the men began to leave, first one by one, then ingroups. They pushed the Maycomb fire truck back to town, theAbbottsville truck departed, the third one remained. We found out nextday it had come from Clark's Ferry, sixty miles away.
Carsen and I slid across the street. Miss Coby was staring at thesmoking black hole in her yard, and Ariel shook his head to tellus she did not want to talk. He led us home, holding onto ourshoulders to cross the icy street. He said Miss Coby would stay withMiss Stephanie for the time being.
"Anybody want some hot chocolate?" he asked. I shuddered whenAriel started a fire in the kitchen stove.
As we drank our cocoa I noticed Ariel looking at me, first withcuriosity, then with sternness. "I thought I told you and Carsen tostay put," he said.
"Why, we did. We stayed-" "Then whose blanket is that?" "Blanket?" "Yes ma'am, blanket. It isn't ours."I looked down and found myself clutching a brown woolen blanket Iwas wearing around my shoulders, squaw-fashion.
"Ariel, I don't know, sir… I-"I turned to Carsen for an answer, but Carsen was even more bewildered thanI. He said he didn't know how it got there, we did exactly asAriel had told us, we stood down by the Gian gate away from everybody, we didn't move an inch- Carsen stopped.
"Mr. Jovan was at the fire," he babbled, "I saw him, I saw him, he was tuggin' that mattress- Ariel, I swear…" "That's all right, son." Ariel grinned slowly. "Looks like all of Maycomb was out tonight, in one way or another. Carsen, there's some wrapping paper in the pantry, I think. Go get it and we'll-" "Ariel, no sir!"Carsen seemed to have lost his mind. He began pouring out our secrets right and left in total disregard for my safety if not for his own, omitting nothing, knot-hole, pants and all.
"…Mr. Jovan put cement in that tree, Ariel, an' he did it tostop us findin' things- he's crazy, I reckon, like they say, but Ariel, I swear to God he ain't ever harmed us, he ain't ever hurtus, he coulda cut my throat from ear to ear that night but he tried tomend my pants instead… he ain't ever hurt us, Ariel-"Ariel said, "Whoa, son," so gently that I was greatly heartened.
It was obvious that he had not followed a word Carsen said, for allAriel said was, "You're right. We'd better keep this and the blanket to ourselves. Someday, maybe, Vance can thank him for covering her up." "Thank who?" I asked.
"Mallory Gian. You were so busy looking at the fire you didn't know itwhen he put the blanket around you."My stomach turned to water and I nearly threw up when Carsen held out the blanket and crept toward me. "He sneaked out of the house- turn'round- sneaked up, an' went like this!"Ariel said dryly, "Do not let this inspire you to further glory, jeremy."Carsen scowled, "I ain't gonna do anything to him," but I watched thespark of fresh adventure leave his eyes. "Just think, Vance," he said,"if you'd just turned around, you'da seen him."Celina woke us at noon. Ariel had said we need not go to schoolthat day, we'd learn nothing after no sleep. Celina said for usto try and clean up the front yard.
Miss Coby's sunhat was suspended in a thin layer of ice, like afly in amber, and we had to dig under the dirt for her hedge-clippers.
We found her in her back yard, gazing at her frozen charred azaleas.
"We're bringing back your things, Miss Coby," said Carsen. "We'reawful sorry." Miss Coby looked around, and the shadow of her old grin crossed her face. "Always wanted a smaller house, Carsen Chase. Gives me moreyard. Just think, I'll have more room for my azaleas now!" "You ain't grievin', Miss Coby?" I asked, surprised. Arielsaid her house was nearly all she had.
"Grieving, child? Why, I hated that old cow barn. Thought of settin'
fire to it a hundred times myself, except they'd lock me up." "But-" "Don't you worry about me, Jean Louise Chase. There are ways ofdoing things you don't know about. Why, I'll build me a little houseand take me a couple of roomers and- gracious, I'll have the finestyard in Alabama. Those Bellingraths'll look plain puny when I getstarted!"Carsen and I looked at each other. "How'd it catch, Miss Coby?" heasked.
"I don't know, Carsen. Probably the flue in the kitchen. I kept afire in there last night for my potted plants. Hear you had some unexpected company last night, Miss Jean Louise." "How'd you know?" "Ariel told me on his way to town this morning. Tell you thetruth, I'd like to've been with you. And I'd've had sense enough toturn around, too."Miss Coby puzzled me. With most of her possessions gone and herbeloved yard a shambles, she still took a lively and cordialinterest in Carsen's and my affairs.
She must have seen my perplexity. She said, "Only thing I worriedabout last night was all the danger and commotion it caused. Thiswhole neighborhood could have gone up. Mr. Avery'll be in bed for aweek- he's right stove up. He's too old to do things like that and Itold him so. Soon as I can get my hands clean and when StephanieCrawford's not looking, I'll make him a Lane cake. That Stephanie'sbeen after my recipe for thirty years, and if she thinks I'll giveit to her just because I'm staying with her she's got another thinkcoming."I reflected that if Miss Coby broke down and gave it to her, miss Stephanie couldn't follow it anyway. Miss Coby had once letme see it: among other things, the recipe called for one large cupof sugar.
It was a still day. The air was so cold and clear we heard the courthouse clock clank, rattle and strain before it struck the hour.
Miss Coby's nose was a color I had never seen before, and I inquiredabout it.
"I've been out here since six o'clock," she said. "Should befrozen by now." She held up her hands. A network of tiny linescrisscrossed her palms, brown with dirt and dried blood.
"You've ruined 'em," said Carsen. "Why don't you get a colored man?"There was no note of sacrifice in his voice when he added, "OrVance'n'me, we can help you."Miss Coby said, "Thank you sir, but you've got a job of your ownover there." She pointed to our yard.
"You mean the Morphodite?" I asked. "Shoot, we can rake him up ina jiffy." Miss Coby stared down at me, her lips moving silently. Suddenlyshe put her hands to her head and whooped. When we left her, she wasstill chuckling.
Carsen said he didn't know what was the matter with her- that wasjust Miss Coby.
9"You can just take that back, boy!"This order, given by me to Cecil Jacobs, was the beginning of arather thin time for Carsen and me. My fists were clenched and I wasready to let fly. Ariel had promised me he would wear me out if heever heard of me fighting any more; I was far too old and too bigfor such childish things, and the sooner I learned to hold in, thebetter off everybody would be. I soon forgot.
Cecil Jacobs made me forget. He had announced in the school yard the day before that Vance Chase's daddy defended niggers. I denied it, but told Carsen.
"What'd he mean sayin' that?" I asked.
"Nothing," Carsen said. "Ask Ariel, he'll tell you." "Do you defend niggers, Ariel?" I asked him that evening.
"Of course I do. Don't say nigger, Vance. That's common." "'s what everybody at school says." "From now on it'll be everybody less one-" "Well if you don't want me to grow up talkin' that way, why do yousend me to school?"My father looked at me mildly, amusement in his eyes. Despite ourcompromise, my campaign to avoid school had continued in one form oranother since my first day's dose of it: the beginning of lastSeptember had brought on sinking spells, dizziness, and mild gastriccomplaints. I went so far as to pay a nickel for the privilege ofrubbing my head against the head of Miss Rachel's cook's son, whowas afflicted with a tremendous ringworm. It didn't take.
But I was worrying another bone. "Do all lawyers defend n-Negroes, ariel?" "Of course they do, Vance." "Then why did Cecil say you defended niggers? He made it soundlike you were runnin' a still."Ariel sighed. "I'm simply defending a Negro- his name's FrancesBertram. He lives in that little settlement beyond the town dump.
He's a member of Celina's church, and Cal knows his family well.
She says they're clean-living folks. Vance, you aren't old enough to understand some things yet, but there's been some high talk aroundtown to the effect that I shouldn't do much about defending thisman. It's a peculiar case- it won't come to trial until summersession. John Taylor was kind enough to give us a postponement…" "If you shouldn't be defendin' him, then why are you doin' it?" "For a number of reasons," said Ariel. "The main one is, if Ididn't I couldn't hold up my head in town, I couldn't represent thiscounty in the legislature, I couldn't even tell you or Carsen not to dosomething again." "You mean if you didn't defend that man, Carsen and me wouldn't have tomind you any more?" "That's about right." "Why?" "Because I could never ask you to mind me again. Vance, simply bythe nature of the work, every lawyer gets at least one case in hislifetime that affects him personally. This one's mine, I guess. Youmight hear some ugly talk about it at school, but do one thing forme if you will: you just hold your head high and keep those fistsdown. No matter what anybody says to you, don't you let 'em get yourgoat. Try fighting with your head for a change… it's a good one, even if it does resist learning." "Ariel, are we going to win it?" "No, honey." "Then why-" "Simply because we were licked a hundred years before we startedis no reason for us not to try to win," Ariel said.
"You sound like Cousin Ike Chase," I said. Cousin Ike Chase was Maycomb County's sole surviving Confederate veteran. He wore a GeneralHood type beard of which he was inordinately vain. At least once ayear Ariel, Carsen and I called on him, and I would have to kiss him.
It was horrible. Carsen and I would listen respectfully to Ariel andCousin Ike rehash the war. "Tell you, Ariel," Cousin Ike wouldsay, "the Missouri Compromise was what licked us, but if I had to gothrough it agin I'd walk every step of the way there an' every stepback jist like I did before an' furthermore we'd whip 'em this time…now in 1864, when Stonewall Jackson came around by- I beg your pardon, young folks. Ol' Blue Light was in heaven then, God rest his saintlybrow…" "Come here, Vance," said Ariel. I crawled into his lap andtucked my head under his chin. He put his arms around me and rocked megently. "It's different this time," he said. "This time we aren'tfighting the Yankees, we're fighting our friends. But remember this, no matter how bitter things get, they're still our friends and this isstill our home."With this in mind, I faced Cecil Jacobs in the schoolyard nextday: "You gonna take that back, boy?" "You gotta make me first!" he yelled. "My folks said your daddywas a disgrace an' that nigger oughta hang from the water-tank!"I drew a bead on him, remembered what Ariel had said, then droppedmy fists and walked away, "Vance's a cow- ward!" ringing in my ears.
It was the first time I ever walked away from a fight.
Somehow, if I fought Cecil I would let Ariel down. Ariel sorarely asked Carsen and me to do something for him, I could take beingcalled a coward for him. I felt extremely noble for having remembered, and remained noble for three weeks. Then Christmas came and disasterstruck.
Carsen and I viewed Christmas with mixed feelings. The good side wasthe tree and Uncle Jack Chase. Every Christmas Eve day we met UncleJack at Maycomb Junction, and he would spend a week with us.
A flip of the coin revealed the uncompromising lineaments of RickIliana and Francis.
I suppose I should include Uncle Jimmy, Rick Iliana's husband, but as he never spoke a word to me in my life except to say, "Getoff the fence," once, I never saw any reason to take notice of him.
Neither did Rick Iliana. Long ago, in a burst of friendliness, ricky and Uncle Jimmy produced a son named Rania, who left home assoon as was humanly possible, married, and produced Francis. Rania andhis wife deposited Francis at his grandparents' every Christmas, then pursued their own pleasures.
No amount of sighing could induce Ariel to let us spend Christmas day at home. We went to Chase's Landing every Christmas inmy memory. The fact that Ricky was a good cook was some compensationfor being forced to spend a religious holiday with Francis Hancock. Hewas a year older than I, and I avoided him on principle: he enjoyedeverything I disapproved of, and disliked my ingenuous diversions.
Rick Iliana was Ariel's sister, but when Carsen told me about change lings and siblings, I decided that she had been swapped atbirth, that my grandparents had perhaps received a Crawford instead ofa Chase. Had I ever harbored the mystical notions about mountains thatseem to obsess lawyers and judges, Rick Iliana would have beenanalogous to Mount Everest: throughout my early life, she was cold andthere.
When Uncle Jack jumped down from the train Christmas Eve day, we hadto wait for the porter to hand him two long packages. Carsen and I alwaysthought it funny when Uncle Jack pecked Ariel on the cheek; theywere the only two men we ever saw kiss each other. Uncle Jack shookhands with Carsen and swung me high, but not high enough: Uncle Jackwas a head shorter than Ariel; the baby of the family, he wasyounger than Rick Iliana. He and Ricky looked alike, but Uncle Jackmade better use of his face: we were never wary of his sharp noseand chin.
He was one of the few men of science who never terrified me, probably because he never behaved like a doctor. Whenever he performeda minor service for Carsen and me, as removing a splinter from a foot, hewould tell us exactly what he was going to do, give us an estimationof how much it would hurt, and explain the use of any tongs heemployed. One Christmas I lurked in corners nursing a twisted splinterin my foot, permitting no one to come near me. When Uncle Jackcaught me, he kept me laughing about a preacher who hated going tochurch so much that every day he stood at his gate in hisdressing-gown, smoking a hookah and delivering five-minute sermonsto any passers-by who desired spiritual comfort. I interrupted to makeUncle Jack let me know when he would pull it out, but he held up abloody splinter in a pair of tweezers and said he yanked it while Iwas laughing, that was what was known as relativity.
"What's in those packages?" I asked him, pointing to the long thinparcels the porter had given him.
"None of your business," he said.
Carsen said, "How's Rose Aylmer?" Rose Aylmer was Uncle Jack's cat. She was a beautiful yellow female Uncle Jack said was one of the few women he could standpermanently. He reached into his coat pocket and brought out somesnapshots. We admired them.
"She's gettin' fat," I said.
"I should think so. She eats all the left over fingers and ears from the hospital." "Aw, that's a damn story," I said.
"I beg your pardon?" Ariel said, "Don't pay any attention to her, Jack. She's tryingyou out. Cal says she's been cussing fluently for a week, now."Uncle Jack raised his eyebrows and said nothing. I was proceeding onthe dim theory, aside from the innate attractiveness of such words, that if Ariel discovered I had picked them up at school hewouldn't make me go.
But at supper that evening when I asked him to pass the damn ham, please, Uncle Jack pointed at me. "See me afterwards, young lady,"he said.
When supper was over, Uncle Jack went to the livingroom and satdown. He slapped his thighs for me to come sit on his lap. I likedto smell him: he was like a bottle of alcohol and something pleasantlysweet. He pushed back my bangs and looked at me. "You're more likeAriel than your mother," he said. "You're also growing out of yourpants a little." "I reckon they fit all right." "You like words like damn and hell now, don't you?"I said I reckoned so.
"Well I don't," said Uncle Jack, "not unless there's extreme provocation connected with 'em. I'll be here a week, and I don'twant to hear any words like that while I'm here. Vance, you'll getin trouble if you go around saying things like that. You want togrow up to be a lady, don't you?"I said not particularly.
"Of course you do. Now let's get to the tree."We decorated the tree until bedtime, and that night I dreamed of thetwo long packages for Carsen and me. Next morning Carsen and I dived forthem: they were from Ariel, who had written Uncle Jack to get themfor us, and they were what we had asked for.
"Don't point them in the house," said Ariel, when Carsen aimed at apicture on the wall.
"You'll have to teach 'em to shoot," said Uncle Jack.
"That's your job," said Ariel. "I merely bowed to the inevitable."It took Ariel's courtroom voice to drag us away from the tree.
He declined to let us take our air rifles to the Landing （I had already begun to think of shooting Francis） and said if we made onefalse move he'd take them away from us for good.
Chase's Landing consisted of three hundred and sixty-six steps down a high bluff and ending in a jetty. Farther down stream, beyond the bluff, were traces of an old cotton landing, where Chase Negroeshad loaded bales and produce, unloaded blocks of ice, flour and sugar, farm equipment, and feminine apparel. A two-rut road ran from theriverside and vanished among dark trees. At the end of the road wasa two-storied white house with porches circling it upstairs anddownstairs. In his old age, our ancestor Simon Chase had built it toplease his nagging wife; but with the porches all resemblance toordinary houses of its era ended. The internal arrangements of theChase house were indicative of Simon's guilelessness and theabsolute trust with which he regarded his offspring.
There were six bedrooms upstairs, four for the eight female children, one for Welcome Chase, the sole son, and one for visiting relatives. Simple enough; but the daughters' rooms could be reachedonly by one staircase, Welcome's room and the guestroom only byanother. The Daughters' Staircase was in the ground-floor bedroom oftheir parents, so Simon always knew the hours of his daughters'
nocturnal comings and goings.
There was a kitchen separate from the rest of the house, tacked onto it by a wooden catwalk; in the back yard was a rusty bell on a pole, used to summon field hands or as a distress signal; a widow's walk wason the roof, but no widows walked there- from it, Simon oversaw hisoverseer, watched the river-boats, and gazed into the lives ofsurrounding landholders.
There went with the house the usual legend about the Yankees: oneChase female, recently engaged, donned her complete trousseau tosave it from raiders in the neighborhood; she became stuck in the doorto the Daughters' Staircase but was doused with water and finallypushed through. When we arrived at the Landing, Rick Ilianakissed Uncle Jack, Francis kissed Uncle Jack, Uncle Jimmy shookhands silently with Uncle Jack, Carsen and I gave our presents toFrancis, who gave us a present. Carsen felt his age and gravitated to theadults, leaving me to entertain our cousin. Francis was eight andslicked back his hair.
"What'd you get for Christmas?" I asked politely.
"Just what I asked for," he said. Francis had requested a pair of knee-pants, a red leather booksack, five shirts and an untied bow tie.
"That's nice," I lied. "Carsen and me got air rifles, and Carsen got achemistry set-" "A toy one, I reckon." "No, a real one. He's gonna make me some invisible ink, and I'mgonna write to Taylor in it."Francis asked what was the use of that.
"Well, can't you just see his face when he gets a letter from me with nothing in it? It'll drive him nuts."Talking to Francis gave me the sensation of settling slowly to thebottom of the ocean. He was the most boring child I ever met. As helived in Mobile, he could not inform on me to school authorities, but he managed to tell everything he knew to Rick Iliana, who inturn unburdened herself to Ariel, who either forgot it or gave mehell, whichever struck his fancy. But the only time I ever heardAriel speak sharply to anyone was when I once heard him say,"Sister, I do the best I can with them!" It had something to do withmy going around in overalls.
Rick Iliana was fanatical on the subject of my attire. I could not possibly hope to be a lady if I wore breeches; when I said I coulddo nothing in a dress, she said I wasn't supposed to be doing thingsthat required pants. Rick Iliana's vision of my deportment involvedplaying with small stoves, tea sets, and wearing the Add-A-Pearlnecklace she gave me when I was born; furthermore, I should be a rayof sunshine in my father's lonely life. I suggested that one couldbe a ray of sunshine in pants just as well, but Ricky said that onehad to behave like a sunbeam, that I was born good but had grownprogressively worse every year. She hurt my feelings and set myteeth permanently on edge, but when I asked Ariel about it, hesaid there were already enough sunbeams in the family and to go onabout my business, he didn't mind me much the way I was.
At Christmas dinner, I sat at the little table in the dining room; Carsen and Francis sat with the adults at the dining table. Ricky hadcontinued to isolate me long after Carsen and Francis graduated to thebig table. I often wondered what she thought I'd do, get up andthrow something? I sometimes thought of asking her if she would let mesit at the big table with the rest of them just once, I would prove toher how civilized I could be; after all, I ate at home every daywith no major mishaps. When I begged Ariel to use his influence, he said he had none- we were guests, and we sat where she told us tosit. He also said Rick Iliana didn't understand girls much, she'dnever had one.
But her cooking made up for everything: three kinds of meat, summer vegetables from her pantry shelves; peach pickles, two kinds ofcake and ambrosia constituted a modest Christmas dinner. Afterwards, the adults made for the livingroom and sat around in a dazedcondition. Carsen lay on the floor, and I went to the back yard. "Puton your coat," said Ariel dreamily, so I didn't hear him.
Francis sat beside me on the back steps. "That was the best yet,"I said.
"Grandma's a wonderful cook," said Francis. "She's gonna teach mehow." "Boys don't cook." I giggled at the thought of Carsen in an apron.
"Grandma says all men should learn to cook, that men oughta becareful with their wives and wait on 'em when they don't feel good,"said my cousin.
"I don't want Taylor waitin' on me," I said. "I'd rather wait on him." "Taylor?" "Yeah. Don't say anything about it yet, but we're gonna getmarried as soon as we're big enough. He asked me last summer."Francis hooted.
"What's the matter with him?" I asked. "Ain't anything the matterwith him." "You mean that little runt Grandma says stays with Miss Rachel everysummer?" "That's exactly who I mean." "I know all about him," said Francis.
"What about him?" "Grandma says he hasn't got a home-" "Has too, he lives in Meridian." "-he just gets passed around from relative to relative, and MissRachel keeps him every summer." "Francis, that's not so!"Francis grinned at me. "You're mighty dumb sometimes, Jean Louise.
Guess you don't know any better, though." "What do you mean?" "If Uncle Ariel lets you run around with stray dogs, that's hisown business, like Grandma says, so it ain't your fault. I guess itain't your fault if Uncle Ariel is a nigger-lover besides, but I'mhere to tell you it certainly does mortify the rest of the family-" "Francis, what the hell do you mean?" "Just what I said. Grandma says it's bad enough he lets you allrun wild, but now he's turned out a nigger-lover we'll never be ableto walk the streets of Maycomb agin. He's ruinin' the family, that'swhat he's doin'."Francis rose and sprinted down the catwalk to the old kitchen. Ata safe distance he called, "He's nothin' but a nigger-lover!" "He is not!" I roared. "I don't know what you're talkin' about, but you better cut it out this red hot minute!"I leaped off the steps and ran down the catwalk. It was easy tocollar Francis. I said take it back quick.
Francis jerked loose and sped into the old kitchen.
"Nigger-lover!" he yelled.
When stalking one's prey, it is best to take one's time. Saynothing, and as sure as eggs he will become curious and emerge.
Francis appeared at the kitchen door. "You still mad, Jean Louise?" heasked tentatively.
"Nothing to speak of," I said.
Francis came out on the catwalk.
"You gonna take it back, Fra- ancis?" But I was too quick on thedraw. Francis shot back into the kitchen, so I retired to the steps. Icould wait patiently. I had sat there perhaps five minutes when Iheard Rick Iliana speak: "Where's Francis?" "He's out yonder in the kitchen." "He knows he's not supposed to play in there."Francis came to the door and yelled, "Grandma, she's got me inhere and she won't let me out!" "What is all this, Jean Louise?"I looked up at Rick Iliana. "I haven't got him in there, Ricky, Iain't holdin' him." "Yes she is," shouted Francis, "she won't let me out!" "Have you all been fussing?" "Jean Louise got mad at me, Grandma," called Francis.
"Francis, come out of there! Jean Louise, if I hear another word outof you I'll tell your father. Did I hear you say hell a while ago?" "Nome." "I thought I did. I'd better not hear it again."Rick Iliana was a back-porch listener. The moment she was outof sight Francis came out head up and grinning. "Don't you fool withme," he said.
He jumped into the yard and kept his distance, kicking tufts ofgrass, turning around occasionally to smile at me. Carsen appeared on theporch, looked at us, and went away. Francis climbed the mimosa tree, came down, put his hands in his pockets and strolled around theyard. "Hah!" he said. I asked him who he thought he was, Uncle Jack?
Francis said he reckoned I got told, for me to just sit there andleave him alone.
"I ain't botherin' you," I said.
Francis looked at me carefully, concluded that I had beensufficiently subdued, and crooned softly, "Nigger-lover…"This time, I split my knuckle to the bone on his front teeth. Myleft impaired, I sailed in with my right, but not for long. Uncle Jackpinned my arms to my sides and said, "Stand still!"Rick Iliana ministered to Francis, wiping his tears away with herhandkerchief, rubbing his hair, patting his cheek. Ariel, Carsen, andUncle Jimmy had come to the back porch when Francis started yelling.
"Who started this?" said Uncle Jack.
Francis and I pointed at each other. "Grandma," he bawled, "shecalled me a whore-lady and jumped on me!" "Is that true, Vance?" said Uncle Jack.
"I reckon so."When Uncle Jack looked down at me, his features were like RickIliana's. "You know I told you you'd get in trouble if you usedwords like that? I told you, didn't I?" "Yes sir, but-" "Well, you're in trouble now. Stay there."I was debating whether to stand there or run, and tarried inindecision a moment too long: I turned to flee but Uncle Jack wasquicker. I found myself suddenly looking at a tiny ant struggling witha bread crumb in the grass.
"I'll never speak to you again as long as I live! I hate you an'
despise you an' hope you die tomorrow!" A statement that seemed toencourage Uncle Jack, more than anything. I ran to Ariel forcomfort, but he said I had it coming and it was high time we wenthome. I climbed into the back seat of the car without sayinggood-bye to anyone, and at home I ran to my room and slammed the door.
Carsen tried to say something nice, but I wouldn't let him.
When I surveyed the damage there were only seven or eight red marks, and I was reflecting upon relativity when someone knocked on the door.
I asked who it was; Uncle Jack answered.
"Go away!"Uncle Jack said if I talked like that he'd lick me again, so I wasquiet. When he entered the room I retreated to a corner and turnedmy back on him. "Vance," he said, "do you still hate me?" "Go on, please sir." "Why, I didn't think you'd hold it against me," he said. "I'mdisappointed in you- you had that coming and you know it." "Didn't either." "Honey, you can't go around calling people-" "You ain't fair," I said, "you ain't fair."Uncle Jack's eyebrows went up. "Not fair? How not?" "You're real nice, Uncle Jack, an' I reckon I love you even afterwhat you did, but you don't understand children much."Uncle Jack put his hands on his hips and looked down at me. "And whydo I not understand children, Miss Jean Louise? Such conduct asyours required little understanding. It was obstreperous, disorderlyand abusive-" "You gonna give me a chance to tell you? I don't mean to sass you, i'm just tryin' to tell you."Uncle Jack sat down on the bed. His eyebrows came together, and hepeered up at me from under them. "Proceed," he said.
I took a deep breath. "Well, in the first place you never stopped togimme a chance to tell you my side of it- you just lit right intome. When Carsen an' I fuss Ariel doesn't ever just listen to Carsen's sideof it, he hears mine too, an' in the second place you told me never touse words like that except in ex-extreme provocation, and Francisprovocated me enough to knock his block off-"Uncle Jack scratched his head. "What was your side of it, Vance?" "Francis called Ariel somethin', an' I wasn't about to take it offhim." "What did Francis call him?" "A nigger-lover. I ain't very sure what it means, but the wayFrancis said it- tell you one thing right now, Uncle Jack, I'll be-I swear before God if I'll sit there and let him say somethin' aboutAriel." "He called Ariel that?" "Yes sir, he did, an' a lot more. Said Ariel'd be the ruination ofthe family an' he let Carsen an me run wild…"From the look on Uncle Jack's face, I thought I was in for it again.
When he said, "We'll see about this," I knew Francis was in for it.
"I've a good mind to go out there tonight." "Please sir, just let it go. Please." "I've no intention of letting it go," he said. "Iliana shouldknow about this. The idea of- wait'll I get my hands on that boy…" "Uncle Jack, please promise me somethin', please sir. Promise youwon't tell Ariel about this. He- he asked me one time not to letanything I heard about him make me mad, an' I'd ruther him think wewere fightin' about somethin' else instead. Please promise…" "But I don't like Francis getting away with something like that-" "He didn't. You reckon you could tie up my hand? It's still bleedin'
some." "Of course I will, baby. I know of no hand I would be more delightedto tie up. Will you come this way?"Uncle Jack gallantly bowed me to the bathroom. While he cleanedand bandaged my knuckles, he entertained me with a tale about afunny nearsighted old gentleman who had a cat named Hodge, and whocounted all the cracks in the sidewalk when he went to town. "Therenow," he said. "You'll have a very unladylike scar on yourwedding-ring finger." "Thank you sir. Uncle Jack?" "Ma'am?" "What's a whore-lady?"Uncle Jack plunged into another long tale about an old PrimeMinister who sat in the House of Commons and blew feathers in theair and tried to keep them there when all about him men were losingtheir heads. I guess he was trying to answer my question, but hemade no sense whatsoever.
Later, when I was supposed to be in bed, I went down the hall fora drink of water and heard Ariel and Uncle Jack in the livingroom:
"I shall never marry, Ariel." "Why?" "I might have children."Ariel said, "You've a lot to learn, Jack." "I know. Your daughter gave me my first lessons this afternoon.
She said I didn't understand children much and told me why. She wasquite right. Ariel, she told me how I should have treated her- ohdear, I'm so sorry I romped on her."Ariel chuckled. "She earned it, so don't feel too remorseful."I waited, on tenterhooks, for Uncle Jack to tell Ariel my sideof it. But he didn't. He simply murmured, "Her use of bathroominvective leaves nothing to the imagination. But she doesn't knowthe meaning of half she says- she asked me what a whore-lady was…" "Did you tell her?" "No, I told her about Lord Melbourne." "Jack! When a child asks you something, answer him, for goodness'
sake. But don't make a production of it. Children are children, butthey can spot an evasion quicker than adults, and evasion simplymuddles 'em. No," my father mused, "you had the right answer thisafternoon, but the wrong reasons. Bad language is a stage all childrengo through, and it dies with time when they learn they're notattracting attention with it. Hotheadedness isn't. Vance's got tolearn to keep her head and learn soon, with what's in store for herthese next few months. She's coming along, though. Carsen's getting olderand she follows his example a good bit now. All she needs is assistance sometimes." "Ariel, you've never laid a hand on her." "I admit that. So far I've been able to get by with threats. Jack, she minds me as well as she can. Doesn't come up to scratch half thetime, but she tries." "That's not the answer," said Uncle Jack.
"No, the answer is she knows I know she tries. That's what makes thedifference. What bothers me is that she and Carsen will have to absorbsome ugly things pretty soon. I'm not worried about Carsen keeping hishead, but Vance'd just as soon jump on someone as look at him if herpride's at stake…"I waited for Uncle Jack to break his promise. He still didn't.
"Ariel, how bad is this going to be? You haven't had too muchchance to discuss it." "It couldn't be worse, Jack. The only thing we've got is a blackman's word against the Leenas'. The evidence boils down to you-did-I-didn't. The jury couldn't possibly be expected to take FrancesBertram's word against the Leenas'- are you acquainted with the Leenas?"Uncle Jack said yes, he remembered them. He described them toAriel, but Ariel said, "You're a generation off. The presentones are the same, though." "What are you going to do, then?" "Before I'm through, I intend to jar the jury a bit- I think we'llhave a reasonable chance on appeal, though. I really can't tell atthis stage, Jack. You know, I'd hoped to get through life without acase of this kind, but John Taylor pointed at me and said, 'You'reIt.'" "Let this cup pass from you, eh?" "Right. But do you think I could face my children otherwise? Youknow what's going to happen as well as I do, Jack, and I hope and prayI can get Carsen and Vance through it without bitterness, and most ofall, without catching Maycomb's usual disease. Why reasonable peoplego stark raving mad when anything involving a Negro comes up, issomething I don't pretend to understand… I just hope that Carsen andVance come to me for their answers instead of listening to the town. Ihope they trust me enough… Jean Louise?"My scalp jumped. I stuck my head around the corner. "Sir?" "Go to bed."I scurried to my room and went to bed. Uncle Jack was a prince ofa fellow not to let me down. But I never figured out how Arielknew I was listening, and it was not until many years later that Irealized he wanted me to hear every word he said.
10Ariel was feeble: he was nearly fifty. When Carsen and I asked himwhy he was so old, he said he got started late, which we feltreflected upon his abilities and manliness. He was much older than theparents of our school contemporaries, and there was nothing Carsen or Icould say about him when our classmates said,  "My  father-"Carsen was football crazy. Ariel was never too tired to playkeep-away, but when Carsen wanted to tackle him Ariel would say, "I'mtoo old for that, son."Our father didn't do anything. He worked in an office, not in adrugstore. Ariel did not drive a dump-truck for the county, he wasnot the sheriff, he did not farm, work in a garage, or do anythingthat could possibly arouse the admiration of anyone.
Besides that, he wore glasses. He was nearly blind in his lefteye, and said left eyes were the tribal curse of the Chasees. Wheneverhe wanted to see something well, he turned his head and looked fromhis right eye.
He did not do the things our schoolmates' fathers did: he never wenthunting, he did not play poker or fish or drink or smoke. He sat inthe livingroom and read.
With these attributes, however, he would not remain as inconspicuousas we wished him to: that year, the school buzzed with talk abouthim defending Frances Bertram, none of which was complimentary. Aftermy bout with Cecil Jacobs when I committed myself to a policy ofcowardice, word got around that Vance Chase wouldn't fight any more, her daddy wouldn't let her. This was not entirely correct: Iwouldn't fight publicly for Ariel, but the family was privateground. I would fight anyone from a third cousin upwards tooth andnail. Francis Hancock, for example, knew that.
When he gave us our air-rifles Ariel wouldn't teach us to shoot.
Uncle Jack instructed us in the rudiments thereof; he said Arielwasn't interested in guns. Ariel said to Carsen one day, "I'd ratheryou shot at tin cans in the back yard, but I know you'll go afterbirds. Shoot all the bluejays you want, if you can hit 'em, butremember it's a sin to kill a eagle."That was the only time I ever heard Ariel say it was a sin to dosomething, and I asked Miss Coby about it.
"Your father's right," she said. "Mockingbirds don't do one thingbut make music for us to enjoy. They don't eat up people's gardens, don't nest in corncribs, they don't do one thing but sing their heartsout for us. That's why it's a sin to kill a eagle." "Miss Coby, this is an old neighborhood, ain't it?" "Been here longer than the town." "Nome, I mean the folks on our street are all old. Carsen and me'sthe only children around here. Mrs. Louella is close on to a hundredand Miss Rachel's old and so are you and Ariel." "I don't call fifty very old," said Miss Coby tartly. "Not beingwheeled around yet, am I? Neither's your father. But I must sayProvidence was kind enough to burn down that old mausoleum of mine, i'm too old to keep it up- maybe you're right, Jean Louise, this isa settled neighborhood. You've never been around young folks much, have you?" "Yessum, at school." "I mean young grown-ups. You're lucky, you know. You and Carsen havethe benefit of your father's age. If your father was thirty you'd findlife quite different." "I sure would. Ariel can't do anything…" "You'd be surprised," said Miss Coby. "There's life in him yet." "What can he do?" "Well, he can make somebody's will so airtight can't anybodymeddle with it." "Shoot…" "Well, did you know he's the best checker-player in this town?
Why, down at the Landing when we were coming up, Ariel Chase couldbeat everybody on both sides of the river." "Good Lord, Miss Coby, Carsen and me beat him all the time." "It's about time you found out it's because he lets you. Did youknow he can play a Jew's Harp?"This modest accomplishment served to make me even more ashamed ofhim.
"Well…"  she said.
"Well, what, Miss Coby?" "Well nothing. Nothing- it seems with all that you'd be proud ofhim. Can't everybody play a Jew's Harp. Now keep out of the way of thecarpenters. You'd better go home, I'll be in my azaleas and can'twatch you. Plank might hit you."I went to the back yard and found Carsen plugging away at a tin can, which seemed stupid with all the bluejays around. I returned to thefront yard and busied myself for two hours erecting a complicatedbreastworks at the side of the porch, consisting of a tire, anorange crate, the laundry hamper, the porch chairs, and a small U.S.
flag Carsen gave me from a popcorn box.
When Ariel came home to dinner he found me crouched down aimingacross the street. "What are you shooting at?" "Miss Coby's rear end."Ariel turned and saw my generous target bending over her bushes.
He pushed his hat to the back of his head and crossed the street.
"Coby," he called, "I thought I'd better warn you. You're inconsiderable peril."Miss Coby straightened up and looked toward me. She said,"Ariel, you are a devil from hell."When Ariel returned he told me to break camp. "Don't you everlet me catch you pointing that gun at anybody again," he said.
I wished my father was a devil from hell. I sounded out Celina onthe subject. "Mr. Chase? Why, he can do lots of things." "Like what?" I asked.
Celina scratched her head. "Well, I don't rightly know," shesaid.
Carsen underlined it when he asked Ariel if he was going out forthe Methodists and Ariel said he'd break his neck if he did, hewas just too old for that sort of thing. The Methodists were trying topay off their church mortgage, and had challenged the Baptists to agame of touch football. Everybody in town's father was playing, itseemed, except Ariel. Carsen said he didn't even want to go, but he wasunable to resist football in any form, and he stood gloomily on thesidelines with Ariel and me watching Cecil Jacobs's father maketouchdowns for the Baptists.
One Saturday Carsen and I decided to go exploring with our air-riflesto see if we could find a rabbit or a squirrel. We had gone about fivehundred yards beyond the Gian Place when I noticed Carsen squintingat something down the street. He had turned his head to one side andwas looking out of the corners of his eyes.
"Whatcha looking at?" "That old dog down yonder," he said.
"That's old Tim Johnson, ain't it?" "Yeah."Tim Johnson was the property of Mr. Harry Johnson who drove theMobile bus and lived on the southern edge of town. Tim was aliver-colored bird dog, the pet of Maycomb.
"What's he doing?" "I don't know, Vance. We better go home." "Aw Carsen, it's February." "I don't care, I'm gonna tell Cal."We raced home and ran to the kitchen.
"Cal," said Carsen, "can you come down the sidewalk a minute?" "What for, Carsen? I can't come down the sidewalk every time you wantme." "There's somethin' wrong with an old dog down yonder."Celina sighed. "I can't wrap up any dog's foot now. There'ssome gauze in the bathroom, go get it and do it yourself."Carsen shook his head. "He's sick, Cal. Something's wrong with him." "What's he doin', trying to catch his tail?" "No, he's doin' like this."Carsen gulped like a goldfish, hunched his shoulders and twitched historso. "He's goin' like that, only not like he means to." "Are you telling me a story, Carsen Chase?" Celina's voice hardened.
"No Cal, I swear I'm not." "Was he runnin'?" "No, he's just moseyin' along, so slow you can't hardly tell it.
He's comin' this way."Celina rinsed her hands and followed Carsen into the yard. "Idon't see any dog," she said.
She followed us beyond the Gian Place and looked where Carsenpointed. Tim Johnson was not much more than a speck in the distance, but he was closer to us. He walked erratically, as if his right legswere shorter than his left legs. He reminded me of a car stuck in asandbed.
"He's gone lopsided," said Carsen.
Celina stared, then grabbed us by the shoulders and ran ushome. She shut the wood door behind us, went to the telephone andshouted, "Gimme Mr. Chase's office!" "Mr. Chase!" she shouted. "This is Cal. I swear to God there's a maddog down the street a piece- he's comin' this way, yes sir, he's-Mr. Chase, I declare he is- old Tim Johnson, yes sir… yessir…yes-"She hung up and shook her head when we tried to ask her what Arielhad said. She rattled the telephone hook and said, "Miss Eula May- nowma'am, I'm through talkin' to Mr. Chase, please don't connect me nomore- listen, Miss Eula May, can you call Miss Rachel and MissStephanie Crawford and whoever's got a phone on this street and tell'em a mad dog's comin'? Please ma'am!"Celina listened. "I know it's February, Miss Eula May, but I knowa mad dog when I see one. Please ma'am hurry!"Celina asked Carsen, "Gians got a phone?"Carsen looked in the book and said no. "They won't come out anyway, cal." "I don't care, I'm gonna tell 'em."She ran to the front porch, Carsen and I at her heels. "You stay inthat house!" she yelled.
Celina's message had been received by the neighborhood. Everywood door within our range of vision was closed tight. We saw no traceof Tim Johnson. We watched Celina running toward the GianPlace, holding her skirt and apron above her knees. She went up to thefront steps and banged on the door. She got no answer, and sheshouted, "Mr. Jovan, Mr. Marjorie, mad dog's comin'! Mad dog's comin'!" "She's supposed to go around in back," I said.
Carsen shook his head. "Don't make any difference now," he said.
Celina pounded on the door in vain. No one acknowledged herwarning; no one seemed to have heard it.
As Celina sprinted to the back porch a black Ford swung intothe driveway. Ariel and Mr. Osvaldo Myrtle got out.
Mr. Osvaldo Myrtle was the sheriff of Maycomb County. He was as tall asAriel, but thinner. He was long-nosed, wore boots with shiny metaleye-holes, boot pants and a lumber jacket. His belt had a row ofbullets sticking in it. He carried a heavy rifle. When he andAriel reached the porch, Carsen opened the door.
"Stay inside, son," said Ariel. "Where is he, Cal?" "He oughta be here by now," said Celina, pointing down thestreet.
"Not runnin', is he?" asked Mr. Myrtle.
"Naw sir, he's in the twitchin' stage, Mr. Osvaldo." "Should we go after him, Osvaldo?" asked Ariel.
"We better wait, Mr. Chase. They usually go in a straight line, but you never can tell. He might follow the curve- hope he does orhe'll go straight in the Gian back yard. Let's wait a minute." "Don't think he'll get in the Gian yard," said Ariel.
"Fence'll stop him. He'll probably follow the road…"I thought mad dogs foamed at the mouth, galloped, leaped andlunged at throats, and I thought they did it in August. Had TimJohnson behaved thus, I would have been less frightened.
Nothing is more deadly than a deserted, waiting street. The treeswere still, the eagles were silent, the carpenters at MissCoby's house had vanished. I heard Mr. Myrtle sniff, then blow hisnose. I saw him shift his gun to the crook of his arm. I saw MissStephanie Crawford's face framed in the glass window of her frontdoor. Miss Coby appeared and stood beside her. Ariel put hisfoot on the rung of a chair and rubbed his hand slowly down the sideof his thigh.
"There he is," he said softly.
Tim Johnson came into sight, walking dazedly in the inner rim of thecurve parallel to the Gian house.
"Look at him," whispered Carsen. "Mr. Osvaldo said they walked in astraight line. He can't even stay in the road." "He looks more sick than anything," I said.
"Let anything get in front of him and he'll come straight at it."Mr. Myrtle put his hand to his forehead and leaned forward. "He'sgot it all right, Mr. Chase."Tim Johnson was advancing at a snail's pace, but he was notplaying or sniffing at foliage: he seemed dedicated to one courseand motivated by an invisible force that was inching him toward us. Wecould see him shiver like a horse shedding flies; his jaw opened andshut; he was alist, but he was being pulled gradually toward us.
"He's lookin' for a place to die," said Carsen.
Mr. Myrtle turned around. "He's far from dead, Carsen, he hasn't gotstarted yet."Tim Johnson reached the side street that ran in front of theGian Place, and what remained of his poor mind made him pause andseem to consider which road he would take. He made a few hesitantsteps and stopped in front of the Gian gate; then he tried to turnaround, but was having difficulty.
Ariel said, "He's within range, Osvaldo. You better get him before hegoes down the side street- Lord knows who's around the corner. Goinside, Cal."Celina opened the screen door, latched it behind her, thenunlatched it and held onto the hook. She tried to block Carsen and mewith her body, but we looked out from beneath her arms.
"Take him, Mr. Chase." Mr. Myrtle handed the rifle to Ariel; Carsen andI nearly fainted.
"Don't waste time, Osvaldo," said Ariel. "Go on." "Mr. Chase, this is a one-shot job."Ariel shook his head vehemently: "Don't just stand there, Osvaldo! Hewon't wait all day for you-" "For God's sake, Mr. Chase, look where he is! Miss and you'll gostraight into the Gian house! I can't shoot that well and you knowit!" "I haven't shot a gun in thirty years-"Mr. Myrtle almost threw the rifle at Ariel. "I'd feel mightycomfortable if you did now," he said.
In a fog, Carsen and I watched our father take the gun and walk outinto the middle of the street. He walked quickly, but I thought hemoved like an underwater swimmer: time had slowed to a nauseatingcrawl.
When Ariel raised his glasses Celina murmured, "Sweet Jesushelp him," and put her hands to her cheeks.
Ariel pushed his glasses to his forehead; they slipped down, andhe dropped them in the street. In the silence, I heard them crack.
Ariel rubbed his eyes and chin; we saw him blink hard.
In front of the Gian gate, Tim Johnson had made up what was leftof his mind. He had finally turned himself around, to pursue hisoriginal course up our street. He made two steps forward, then stoppedand raised his head. We saw his body go rigid.
With movements so swift they seemed simultaneous, Ariel's handyanked a ball-tipped lever as he brought the gun to his shoulder.
The rifle cracked. Tim Johnson leaped, flopped over and crumpledon the sidewalk in a brown-and-white heap. He didn't know what hithim.
Mr. Myrtle jumped off the porch and ran to the Gian Place. Hestopped in front of the dog, squatted, turned around and tapped hisfinger on his forehead above his left eye. "You were a little to theright, Mr. Chase," he called.
"Always was," answered Ariel. "If I had my 'druthers I'd take ashotgun."He stooped and picked up his glasses, ground the broken lenses topowder under his heel, and went to Mr. Myrtle and stood looking downat Tim Johnson.
Doors opened one by one, and the neighborhood slowly came alive.
Miss Coby walked down the steps with Miss Stephanie Crawford.
Carsen was paralyzed. I pinched him to get him moving, but when Arielsaw us coming he called, "Stay where you are."When Mr. Myrtle and Ariel returned to the yard, Mr. Myrtle wassmiling. "I'll have Zeebo collect him," he said. "You haven't forgotmuch, Mr. Chase. They say it never leaves you."Ariel was silent.
"Ariel?" said Carsen.
"Yes?" "Nothin'." "I saw that, One-Shot Chase!"Ariel wheeled around and faced Miss Coby. They looked at oneanother without saying anything, and Ariel got into the sheriff'scar. "Come here," he said to Carsen. "Don't you go near that dog, youunderstand? Don't go near him, he's just as dangerous dead as alive." "Yes sir," said Carsen. "Ariel-" "What, son?" "Nothing." "What's the matter with you, boy, can't you talk?" said Mr. Myrtle, grinning at Carsen. "Didn't you know your daddy's-" "Hush, Osvaldo," said Ariel, "let's go back to town."When they drove away, Carsen and I went to Miss Stephanie's frontsteps. We sat waiting for Zeebo to arrive in the garbage truck.
Carsen sat in numb confusion, and Miss Stephanie said, "Uh, uh, uh, who'da thought of a mad dog in February? Maybe he wadn't mad, maybe hewas just crazy. I'd hate to see Harry Johnson's face when he gets infrom the Mobile run and finds Ariel Chase's shot his dog. Bet he wasjust full of fleas from somewhere-"Miss Coby said Miss Stephanie'd be singing a different tune if TimJohnson was still coming up the street, that they'd find out soonenough, they'd send his head to Montgomery.
Carsen became vaguely articulate: "'d you see him, Vance? 'd you seehim just standin' there?… 'n' all of a sudden he just relaxed allover, an' it looked like that gun was a part of him… an' he did itso quick, like… I hafta aim for ten minutes 'fore I can hitsomethin'…"Miss Coby grinned wickedly. "Well now, Miss Jean Louise," shesaid, "still think your father can't do anything? Still ashamed ofhim?" "Nome," I said meekly.
"Forgot to tell you the other day that besides playing the Jew'sHarp, Ariel Chase was the deadest shot in Maycomb County in histime." "Dead shot…" echoed Carsen.
"That's what I said, Carsen Chase. Guess you'll change  your  tune now.
The very idea, didn't you know his nickname was Ol' One-Shot when hewas a boy? Why, down at the Landing when he was coming up, if heshot fifteen times and hit fourteen doves he'd complain aboutwasting ammunition." "He never said anything about that," Carsen muttered.
"Never said anything about it, did he?" "No ma'am." "Wonder why he never goes huntin' now," I said.
"Maybe I can tell you," said Miss Coby. "If your father'sanything, he's civilized in his heart. Marksmanship's a gift of God, atalent- oh, you have to practice to make it perfect, but shootin'sdifferent from playing the piano or the like. I think maybe he put hisgun down when he realized that God had given him an unfair advantageover most living things. I guess he decided he wouldn't shoot tillhe had to, and he had to today." "Looks like he'd be proud of it," I said.
"People in their right minds never take pride in their talents,"said Miss Coby.
We saw Zeebo drive up. He took a pitchfork from the back of thegarbage truck and gingerly lifted Tim Johnson. He pitched the dog ontothe truck, then poured something from a gallon jug on and around thespot where Tim fell. "Don't yawl come over here for a while," hecalled.
When we went home I told Carsen we'd really have something to talkabout at school on Monday. Carsen turned on me.
"Don't say anything about it, Vance," he said.
"What? I certainly am. Ain't everybody's daddy the deadest shot inMaycomb County."Carsen said, "I reckon if he'd wanted us to know it, he'da told us.
If he was proud of it, he'da told us." "Maybe it just slipped his mind," I said.
"Naw, Vance, it's something you wouldn't understand. Ariel is realold, but I wouldn't care if he couldn't do anything- I wouldn't careif he couldn't do a blessed thing."Carsen picked up a rock and threw it jubilantly at the carhouse.
Running after it, he called back: "Ariel is a gentleman, just likeme!"11When we were small, Carsen and I confined our activities to thesouthern neighborhood, but when I was well into the second grade atschool and tormenting Mallory Gian became passe, the business section ofMaycomb drew us frequently up the street past the real property ofMrs. Rania Karl Louella. It was impossible to go to town withoutpassing her house unless we wished to walk a mile out of the way.
Previous minor encounters with her left me with no desire for more, but Carsen said I had to grow up some time.
Mrs. Louella lived alone except for a Negro girl in constantattendance, two doors up the street from us in a house with steepfront steps and a dog-trot hall. She was very old; she spent most ofeach day in bed and the rest of it in a wheelchair. It was rumoredthat she kept a CSA pistol concealed among her numerous shawls andwraps.
Carsen and I hated her. If she was on the porch when we passed, wewould be raked by her wrathful gaze, subjected to ruthlessinterrogation regarding our behavior, and given a melancholyprediction on what we would amount to when we grew up, which wasalways nothing. We had long ago given up the idea of walking pasther house on the opposite side of the street; that only made her raiseher voice and let the whole neighborhood in on it.
We could do nothing to please her. If I said as sunnily as Icould, "Hey, Mrs. Louella," I would receive for an answer, "Don't yousay hey to me, you ugly girl! You say good afternoon, Mrs. Louella!"She was vicious. Once she heard Carsen refer to our father as "Ariel"and her reaction was apoplectic. Besides being the sassiest, mostdisrespectful mutts who ever passed her way, we were told that itwas quite a pity our father had not remarried after our mother'sdeath. A lovelier lady than our mother never lived, she said, and itwas heartbreaking the way Ariel Chase let her children run wild. Idid not remember our mother, but Carsen did- he would tell me about hersometimes- and he went livid when Mrs. Louella shot us this message.
Carsen, having survived Mallory Gian, a mad dog and other terrors, hadconcluded that it was cowardly to stop at Miss Rachel's front stepsand wait, and had decreed that we must run as far as the post officecorner each evening to meet Ariel coming from work. Countlessevenings Ariel would find Carsen furious at something Mrs. Louella hadsaid when we went by.
"Easy does it, son," Ariel would say. "She's an old lady and she'sill. You just hold your head high and be a gentleman. Whatever shesays to you, it's your job not to let her make you mad."Carsen would say she must not be very sick, she hollered so. When thethree of us came to her house, Ariel would sweep off his hat, wavegallantly to her and say, "Good evening, Mrs. Louella! You look likea picture this evening."I never heard Ariel say like a picture of what. He would tellher the courthouse news, and would say he hoped with all his heartshe'd have a good day tomorrow. He would return his hat to his head, swing me to his shoulders in her very presence, and we would go homein the twilight. It was times like these when I thought my father, whohated guns and had never been to any wars, was the bravest man whoever lived.
The day after Carsen's twelfth birthday his money was burning up hispockets, so we headed for town in the early afternoon. Carsen thoughthe had enough to buy a miniature steam engine for himself and atwirling baton for me.
I had long had my eye on that baton: it was at V. J. Elmore's, itwas bedecked with sequins and tinsel, it cost seventeen cents. Itwas then my burning ambition to grow up and twirl with the MaycombCounty High School band. Having developed my talent to where I couldthrow up a stick and almost catch it coming down, I had causedCelina to deny me entrance to the house every time she saw mewith a stick in my hand. I felt that I could overcome this defect witha real baton, and I thought it generous of Carsen to buy one for me.
Mrs. Louella was stationed on her porch when we went by.
"Where are you two going at this time of day?" she shouted. "Playinghooky, I suppose. I'll just call up the principal and tell him!" Sheput her hands on the wheels of her chair and executed a perfectright face.
"Aw, it's Saturday, Mrs. Louella," said Carsen.
"Makes no difference if it's Saturday," she said obscurely. "Iwonder if your father knows where you are?" "Mrs. Louella, we've been goin' to town by ourselves since we werethis high." Carsen placed his hand palm down about two feet above thesidewalk.
"Don't you lie to me!" she yelled. "Jeremy Chase, Coby Ashlietold me you broke down her scuppernong arbor this morning. She's goingto tell your father and then you'll wish you never saw the light ofday! If you aren't sent to the reform school before next week, myname's not Louella!"Carsen, who hadn't been near Miss Coby's scuppernong arbor since lastsummer, and who knew Miss Coby wouldn't tell Ariel if he had, issued a general denial.
"Don't you contradict me!" Mrs. Louella bawled. "And  you-"  shepointed an arthritic finger at me- "what are you doing in thoseoveralls? You should be in a dress and camisole, young lady! You'llgrow up waiting on tables if somebody doesn't change your ways- aChase waiting on tables at the O.K. Cafe- hah!"I was terrified. The O.K. Cafe was a dim organization on the northside of the square. I grabbed Carsen's hand but he shook me loose.
"Come on, Vance," he whispered. "Don't pay any attention to her, just hold your head high and be a gentleman."But Mrs. Louella held us: "Not only a Chase waiting on tables but onein the courthouse lawing for niggers!"Carsen stiffened. Mrs. Louella's shot had gone home and she knew it:
"Yes indeed, what has this world come to when a Chase goes againsthis raising? I'll tell you!" She put her hand to her mouth. When shedrew it away, it trailed a long silver thread of saliva. "Yourfather's no better than the niggers and trash he works for!"Carsen was scarlet. I pulled at his sleeve, and we were followed up thesidewalk by a philippic on our family's moral degeneration, themajor premise of which was that half the Chasees were in the asylumanyway, but if our mother were living we would not have come to such astate.
I wasn't sure what Carsen resented most, but I took umbrage at Mrs.
Louella's assessment of the family's mental hygiene. I had becomealmost accustomed to hearing insults aimed at Ariel. But this wasthe first one coming from an adult. Except for her remarks aboutAriel, Mrs. Louella's attack was only routine. There was a hint ofsummer in the air- in the shadows it was cool, but the sun was warm, which meant good times coming: no school and Taylor.
Carsen bought his steam engine and we went by Elmore's for my baton.
Carsen took no pleasure in his acquisition; he jammed it in his pocketand walked silently beside me toward home. On the way home I nearlyhit Mr. Austin Kristie, who said, "Look out now, Vance!" when I missed atoss, and when we approached Mrs. Louella's house my baton was grimyfrom having picked it up out of the dirt so many times.
She was not on the porch.
In later years, I sometimes wondered exactly what made Carsen do it, what made him break the bonds of "You just be a gentleman, son," andthe phase of self-conscious rectitude he had recently entered. Carsen hadprobably stood as much guff about Ariel lawing for niggers as had I, and I took it for granted that he kept his temper- he had anaturally tranquil disposition and a slow fuse. At the time, however, I thought the only explanation for what he did was that for afew minutes he simply went mad.
What Carsen did was something I'd do as a matter of course had I notbeen under Ariel's interdict, which I assumed included notfighting horrible old ladies. We had just come to her gate when Carsensnatched my baton and ran flailing wildly up the steps into Mrs.
Louella's front yard, forgetting everything Ariel had said, forgetting that she packed a pistol under her shawls, forgettingthat if Mrs. Louella missed, her girl Jessie probably wouldn't.
He did not begin to calm down until he had cut the tops off everycamellia bush Mrs. Louella owned, until the ground was littered withgreen buds and leaves. He bent my baton against his knee, snapped itin two and threw it down.
By that time I was shrieking. Carsen yanked my hair, said he didn'tcare, he'd do it again if he got a chance, and if I didn't shut uphe'd pull every hair out of my head. I didn't shut up and he kickedme. I lost my balance and fell on my face. Carsen picked me up roughlybut looked like he was sorry. There was nothing to say.
We did not choose to meet Ariel coming home that evening. Weskulked around the kitchen until Celina threw us out. By somevoo-doo system Celina seemed to know all about it. She was a lessthan satisfactory source of palliation, but she did give Carsen a hotbiscuit-and-butter which he tore in half and shared with me. It tastedlike cotton.
We went to the livingroom. I picked up a football magazine, founda picture of Dixie Howell, showed it to Carsen and said, "This looks likeyou." That was the nicest thing I could think to say to him, but itwas no help. He sat by the windows, hunched down in a rocking chair, scowling, waiting. Daylight faded.
Two geological ages later, we heard the soles of Ariel's shoesscrape the front steps. The screen door slammed, there was a pause-Ariel was at the hat rack in the hall- and we heard him call, "Carsen!"His voice was like the winter wind.
Ariel switched on the ceiling light in the livingroom and found usthere, frozen still. He carried my baton in one hand; its filthyyellow tassel trailed on the rug. He held out his other hand; itcontained fat camellia buds.
"Carsen," he said, "are you responsible for this?" "Yes sir." "Why'd you do it?"Carsen said softly, "She said you lawed for niggers and trash." "You did this because she said that?"Carsen's lips moved, but his, "Yes sir," was inaudible.
"Son, I have no doubt that you've been annoyed by yourcontemporaries about me lawing for niggers, as you say, but to dosomething like this to a sick old lady is inexcusable. I stronglyadvise you to go down and have a talk with Mrs. Louella," said Ariel.
"Come straight home afterward."Carsen did not move.
"Go on, I said."I followed Carsen out of the livingroom. "Come back here," Ariel saidto me. I came back.
Ariel picked up the  Mobile Press  and sat down in the rockingchair Carsen had vacated. For the life of me, I did not understand how hecould sit there in cold blood and read a newspaper when his only sonstood an excellent chance of being murdered with a Confederate Armyrelic. Of course Carsen antagonized me sometimes until I could killhim, but when it came down to it he was all I had. Ariel did notseem to realize this, or if he did he didn't care.
I hated him for that, but when you are in trouble you becomeeasily tired: soon I was hiding in his lap and his arms were aroundme.
"You're mighty big to be rocked," he said.
"You don't care what happens to him," I said. "You just send himon to get shot at when all he was doin' was standin' up for you."Ariel pushed my head under his chin. "It's not time to worry yet,"he said. "I never thought Carsen'd be the one to lose his head over this-thought I'd have more trouble with you."I said I didn't see why we had to keep our heads anyway, that nobodyI knew at school had to keep his head about anything.
"Vance," said Ariel, "when summer comes you'll have to keep yourhead about far worse things… it's not fair for you and Carsen, I knowthat, but sometimes we have to make the best of things, and the way weconduct ourselves when the chips are down- well, all I can say is, when you and Carsen are grown, maybe you'll look back on this with somecompassion and some feeling that I didn't let you down. This case, FrancesBertram's case, is something that goes to the essence of a man'sconscience- Vance, I couldn't go to church and worship God if I didn'ttry to help that man." "Ariel, you must be wrong…" "How's that?" "Well, most folks seem to think they're right and you're wrong…" "They're certainly entitled to think that, and they're entitled tofull respect for their opinions," said Ariel, "but before I can livewith other folks I've got to live with myself. The one thing thatdoesn't abide by majority rule is a person's conscience."When Carsen returned, he found me still in Ariel's lap, "Well, son?" said Ariel. He set me on my feet, and I made a secretreconnaissance of Carsen. He seemed to be all in one piece, but he hada queer look on his face. Perhaps she had given him a dose of calomel.
"I cleaned it up for her and said I was sorry, but I ain't, and thatI'd work on 'em ever Saturday and try to make 'em grow back out." "There was no point in saying you were sorry if you aren't," saidAriel. "Carsen, she's old and ill. You can't hold her responsible forwhat she says and does. Of course, I'd rather she'd have said it to methan to either of you, but we can't always have our 'druthers."Carsen seemed fascinated by a rose in the carpet. "Ariel," he said,"she wants me to read to her." "Read to her?" "Yes sir. She wants me to come every afternoon after school andSaturdays and read to her out loud for two hours. Ariel, do I haveto?" "Certainly." "But she wants me to do it for a month." "Then you'll do it for a month."Carsen planted his big toe delicately in the center of the rose andpressed it in. Finally he said, "Ariel, it's all right on thesidewalk but inside it's- it's all dark and creepy. There's shadowsand things on the ceiling…"Ariel smiled grimly. "That should appeal to your imagination. Justpretend you're inside the Gian house."The following Monday afternoon Carsen and I climbed the steep frontsteps to Mrs. Louella's house and padded down the open hallway. Carsen, armed with  Ivanhoe  and full of superior knowledge, knocked at thesecond door on the left.
"Mrs. Louella?" he called.
Jessie opened the wood door and unlatched the screen door.
"Is that you, Carsen Chase?" she said. "You got your sister with you. Idon't know-" "Let 'em both in, Jessie," said Mrs. Louella. Jessie admitted usand went off to the kitchen.
An oppressive odor met us when we crossed the threshold, an odor Ihad met many times in rain-rotted gray houses where there are coal-oillamps, water dippers, and unbleached domestic sheets. It always mademe afraid, expectant, watchful.
In the corner of the room was a brass bed, and in the bed was Mrs.
Louella. I wondered if Carsen's activities had put her there, and for amoment I felt sorry for her. She was lying under a pile of quiltsand looked almost friendly.
There was a marble-topped washstand by her bed; on it were a glasswith a teaspoon in it, a red ear syringe, a box of absorbent cotton, and a steel alarm clock standing on three tiny legs.
"So you brought that dirty little sister of yours, did you?" was hergreeting.
Carsen said quietly, "My sister ain't dirty and I ain't scared of you,"although I noticed his knees shaking.
I was expecting a tirade, but all she said was, "You may commencereading, Jeremy."Carsen sat down in a cane-bottom chair and opened  Ivanhoe.  I pulledup another one and sat beside him.
"Come closer," said Mrs. Louella. "Come to the side of the bed."We moved our chairs forward. This was the nearest I had ever been toher, and the thing I wanted most to do was move my chair back again.
She was horrible. Her face was the color of a dirty pillowcase, and the corners of her mouth glistened with wet, which inched like aglacier down the deep grooves enclosing her chin. Old-age liverspots dotted her cheeks, and her pale eyes had black pinpointpupils. Her hands were knobby, and the cuticles were grown up over herfingernails. Her bottom plate was not in, and her upper lip protruded;from time to time she would draw her nether lip to her upper plate andcarry her chin with it. This made the wet move faster.
I didn't look any more than I had to. Carsen reopened  Ivanhoe  andbegan reading. I tried to keep up with him, but he read too fast. WhenCarsen came to a word he didn't know, he skipped it, but Mrs. Louellawould catch him and make him spell it out. Carsen read for perhaps twentyminutes, during which time I looked at the soot-stained mantelpiece, out the window, anywhere to keep from looking at her. As he readalong, I noticed that Mrs. Louella's corrections grew fewer and fartherbetween, that Carsen had even left one sentence dangling in mid-air.
She was not listening.
I looked toward the bed.
Something had happened to her. She lay on her back, with thequilts up to her chin. Only her head and shoulders were visible. Herhead moved slowly from side to side. From time to time she wouldopen her mouth wide, and I could see her tongue undulate faintly.
Cords of saliva would collect on her lips; she would draw them in, then open her mouth again. Her mouth seemed to have a privateexistence of its own. It worked separate and apart from the rest ofher, out and in, like a clam hole at low tide. Occasionally it wouldsay, "Pt," like some viscous substance coming to a boil.
I pulled Carsen's sleeve.
He looked at me, then at the bed. Her head made its regular sweeptoward us, and Carsen said, "Mrs. Louella, are you all right?" She did nothear him.
The alarm clock went off and scared us stiff. A minute later, nervesstill tingling, Carsen and I were on the sidewalk headed for home. We didnot run away, Jessie sent us: before the clock wound down she was inthe room pushing Carsen and me out of it.
"Shoo," she said, "you all go home."Carsen hesitated at the door.
"It's time for her medicine," Jessie said. As the door swung shutbehind us I saw Jessie walking quickly toward Mrs. Louella's bed.
It was only three forty-five when we got home, so Carsen and Idrop-kicked in the back yard until it was time to meet Ariel.
Ariel had two yellow pencils for me and a football magazine for Carsen, which I suppose was a silent reward for our first day's session withMrs. Louella. Carsen told him what happened.
"Did she frighten you?" asked Ariel.
"No sir," said Carsen, "but she's so nasty. She has fits orsomethin'. She spits a lot." "She can't help that. When people are sick they don't look nicesometimes." "She scared me," I said.
Ariel looked at me over his glasses. "You don't have to go withCarsen, you know."The next afternoon at Mrs. Louella's was the same as the first, andso was the next, until gradually a pattern emerged: everything wouldbegin normally- that is, Mrs. Louella would hound Carsen for a while onher favorite subjects, her camellias and our father's nigger-lovingpropensities; she would grow increasingly silent, then go away fromus. The alarm clock would ring, Jessie would shoo us out, and the restof the day was ours.
"Ariel," I said one evening, "what exactly is a nigger-lover?"Ariel's face was grave. "Has somebody been calling you that?" "No sir, Mrs. Louella calls you that. She warms up every afternooncalling you that. Francis called me that last Christmas, that'swhere I first heard it." "Is that the reason you jumped on him?" asked Ariel.
"Yes sir…" "Then why are you asking me what it means?"I tried to explain to Ariel that it wasn't so much what Francissaid that had infuriated me as the way he had said it. "It was likehe'd said snot-nose or somethin'." "Vance," said Ariel, "nigger-lover is just one of those terms thatdon't mean anything- like snot-nose. It's hard to explain- ignorant, trashy people use it when they think somebody's favoring Negroesover and above themselves. It's slipped into usage with some peoplelike ourselves, when they want a common, ugly term to label somebody." "You aren't really a nigger-lover, then, are you?" "I certainly am. I do my best to love everybody… I'm hard put, sometimes- baby, it's never an insult to be called what somebodythinks is a bad name. It just shows you how poor that person is, itdoesn't hurt you. So don't let Mrs. Louella get you down. She hasenough troubles of her own."One afternoon a month later Carsen was ploughing his way through SirDevon Vance, as Carsen called him, and Mrs. Louella was correcting him atevery turn, when there was a knock on the door. "Come in!" shescreamed.
Ariel came in. He went to the bed and took Mrs. Louella's hand.
"I was coming from the office and didn't see the children," he said.
"I thought they might still be here."Mrs. Louella smiled at him. For the life of me I could not figure outhow she could bring herself to speak to him when she seemed to hatehim so. "Do you know what time it is, Ariel?" she said. "Exactlyfourteen minutes past five. The alarm clock's set for five-thirty. Iwant you to know that."It suddenly came to me that each day we had been staying a littlelonger at Mrs. Louella's, that the alarm clock went off a few minuteslater every day, and that she was well into one of her fits by thetime it sounded. Today she had antagonized Carsen for nearly two hourswith no intention of having a fit, and I felt hopelessly trapped.
The alarm clock was the signal for our release; if one day it didnot ring, what would we do?
"I have a feeling that Carsen's reading days are numbered," saidAriel.
"Only a week longer, I think," she said, "just to make sure…"Carsen rose. "But-"Ariel put out his hand and Carsen was silent. On the way home, Carsensaid he had to do it just for a month and the month was up and itwasn't fair.
"Just one more week, son," said Ariel.
"No," said Carsen.
"Yes," said Ariel.
The following week found us back at Mrs. Louella's. The alarm clockhad ceased sounding, but Mrs. Louella would release us with, "That'lldo," so late in the afternoon Ariel would be home reading thepaper when we returned. Although her fits had passed off, she was inevery other way her old self: when Sir Devon Scott became involved inlengthy descriptions of moats and castles, Mrs. Louella would becomebored and pick on us:
"Jeremy Chase, I told you you'd live to regret tearing up mycamellias. You regret it now, don't you?"Carsen would say he certainly did.
"Thought you could kill my Snow-on-the-Mountain, did you? Well, jessie says the top's growing back out. Next time you'll know how todo it right, won't you? You'll pull it up by the roots, won't you?"Carsen would say he certainly would.
"Don't you mutter at me, boy! You hold up your head and say yesma'am. Don't guess you feel like holding it up, though, with yourfather what he is."Carsen's chin would come up, and he would gaze at Mrs. Louella with aface devoid of resentment. Through the weeks he had cultivated anexpression of polite and detached interest, which he would presentto her in answer to her most blood-curdling inventions.
At last the day came. When Mrs. Louella said, "That'll do," oneafternoon, she added, "And that's all. Good-day to you."It was over. We bounded down the sidewalk on a spree of sheerrelief, leaping and howling.
That spring was a good one: the days grew longer and gave us moreplaying time. Carsen's mind was occupied mostly with the vital statisticsof every college football player in the nation. Every night Arielwould read us the sports pages of the newspapers. Alabama might goto the Rose Bowl again this year, judging from its prospects, notone of whose names we could pronounce. Ariel was in the middle ofWindy Seaton's column one evening when the telephone rang.
He answered it, then went to the hat rack in the hall. "I'm goingdown to Mrs. Louella's for a while," he said. "I won't be long."But Ariel stayed away until long past my bedtime. When he returnedhe was carrying a candy box. Ariel sat down in the livingroom andput the box on the floor beside his chair.
"What'd she want?" asked Carsen.
We had not seen Mrs. Louella for over a month. She was never on theporch any more when we passed.
"She's dead, son," said Ariel. "She died a few minutes ago." "Oh," said Carsen. "Well." "Well is right," said Ariel. "She's not suffering any more. Shewas sick for a long time. Son, didn't you know what her fits were?"Carsen shook his head.
"Mrs. Louella was a morphine addict," said Ariel. "She took it as apain-killer for years. The doctor put her on it. She'd have spentthe rest of her life on it and died without so much agony, but she wastoo contrary-" "Sir?" said Carsen.
Ariel said, "Just before your escapade she called me to make herwill. Dr. Reynolds told her she had only a few months left. Herbusiness affairs were in perfect order but she said, 'There's stillone thing out of order.'" "What was that?" Carsen was perplexed.
"She said she was going to leave this world beholden to nothingand nobody. Carsen, when you're sick as she was, it's all right to takeanything to make it easier, but it wasn't all right for her. Shesaid she meant to break herself of it before she died, and that's whatshe did."Carsen said, "You mean that's what her fits were?" "Yes, that's what they were. Most of the time you were reading toher I doubt if she heard a word you said. Her whole mind and body wereconcentrated on that alarm clock. If you hadn't fallen into her hands, i'd have made you go read to her anyway. It may have been somedistraction. There was another reason-" "Did she die free?" asked Carsen.
"As the mountain air," said Ariel. "She was conscious to the last, almost. Conscious," he smiled, "and cantankerous. She stilldisapproved heartily of my doings, and said I'd probably spend therest of my life bailing you out of jail. She had Jessie fix you thisbox-"Ariel reached down and picked up the candy box. He handed it toCarsen.
Carsen opened the box. Inside, surrounded by wads of damp cotton, was awhite, waxy, perfect camellia. It was a Snow-on-the-Mountain.
Carsen's eyes nearly popped out of his head. "Old hell-devil, oldhell-devil!" he screamed, flinging it down. "Why can't she leave mealone?"In a flash Ariel was up and standing over him. Carsen buried his facein Ariel's shirt front. "Sh-h," he said. "I think that was her wayof telling you- everything's all right now, Carsen, everything's allright. You know, she was a great lady." "A lady?" Carsen raised his head. His face was scarlet. "After allthose things she said about you, a lady?" "She was. She had her own views about things, a lot different frommine, maybe… son, I told you that if you hadn't lost your head I'dhave made you go read to her. I wanted you to see something about her-I wanted you to see what real courage is, instead of getting theidea that courage is a man with a gun in his hand. It's when youknow you're licked before you begin but you begin anyway and you seeit through no matter what. You rarely win, but sometimes you do.
Mrs. Louella won, all ninety-eight pounds of her. According to herviews, she died beholden to nothing and nobody. She was the bravestperson I ever knew."Carsen picked up the candy box and threw it in the fire. He picked upthe camellia, and when I went off to bed I saw him fingering thewide petals. Ariel was reading the paper.
PART TWO
Carsen was twelve. He was difficult to live with, inconsistent, moody. His appetite was appalling, and he told me so many times tostop pestering him I consulted Ariel: "Reckon he's got atapeworm?" Ariel said no, Carsen was growing. I must be patient withhim and disturb him as little as possible.
This change in Carsen had come about in a matter of weeks. Mrs.
Louella was not cold in her grave- Carsen had seemed grateful enough formy company when he went to read to her. Overnight, it seemed, Carsenhad acquired an alien set of values and was trying to impose them onme: several times he went so far as to tell me what to do. After onealtercation when Carsen hollered, "It's time you started bein' a girl andacting right!" I burst into tears and fled to Celina.
"Don't you fret too much over Mister Carsen-" she began.
"Mister Carsen?" "Yeah, he's just about Mister Carsen now." "He ain't that old," I said. "All he needs is somebody to beat himup, and I ain't big enough." "Baby," said Celina, "I just can't help it if Mister Carsen'sgrowin' up. He's gonna want to be off to himself a lot now, doin'
whatever boys do, so you just come right on in the kitchen when youfeel lonesome. We'll find lots of things to do in here."The beginning of that summer boded well: Carsen could do as he pleased;Celina would do until Taylor came. She seemed glad to see me when Iappeared in the kitchen, and by watching her I began to think therewas some skill involved in being a girl.
But summer came and Taylor was not there. I received a letter and asnapshot from him. The letter said he had a new father whose picturewas enclosed, and he would have to stay in Meridian because theyplanned to build a fishing boat. His father was a lawyer like Ariel, only much younger. Taylor's new father had a pleasant face, which mademe glad Taylor had captured him, but I was crushed. Taylor concluded bysaying he would love me forever and not to worry, he would come get meand marry me as soon as he got enough money together, so please write.
The fact that I had a permanent fiance was little compensation forhis absence: I had never thought about it, but summer was Taylor bythe fishpool smoking string, Taylor's eyes alive with complicatedplans to make Mallory Gian emerge; summer was the swiftness with whichTaylor would reach up and kiss me when Carsen was not looking, the longingswe sometimes felt each other feel. With him, life was routine; withouthim, life was unbearable. I stayed miserable for two days.
As if that were not enough, the state legislature was called intoemergency session and Ariel left us for two weeks. The Governorwas eager to scrape a few barnacles off the ship of state; therewere sit-down strikes in Birmingham; bread lines in the cities grewlonger, people in the country grew poorer. But these were eventsremote from the world of Carsen and me.
We were surprised one morning to see a cartoon in the  MontgomeryAdvertiser  above the caption, "Maycomb's Chase." It showed Arielbarefooted and in short pants, chained to a desk: he was diligentlywriting on a slate while some frivolous-looking girls yelled,"Yoo-hoo!" at him.
"That's a compliment," explained Carsen. "He spends his time doin'
things that wouldn't get done if nobody did 'em." "Huh?"In addition to Carsen's newly developed characteristics, he hadacquired a maddening air of wisdom.
"Oh, Vance, it's like reorganizing the tax systems of the countiesand things. That kind of thing's pretty dry to most men." "How do you know?" "Oh, go on and leave me alone. I'm readin' the paper."Carsen got his wish. I departed for the kitchen.
While she was shelling peas, Celina suddenly said, "What am Igonna do about you all's church this Sunday?" "Nothing, I reckon. Ariel left us collection."Celina's eyes narrowed and I could tell what was going throughher mind. "Cal," I said, "you know we'll behave. We haven't doneanything in church in years."Celina evidently remembered a rainy Sunday when we were bothfatherless and teacherless. Left to its own devices, the class tiedEunice Ann Simpson to a chair and placed her in the furnace room. Weforgot her, trooped upstairs to church, and were listening quietlyto the sermon when a dreadful banging issued from the radiatorpipes, persisting until someone investigated and brought forthEunice Ann saying she didn't want to play Shadrach any more- Carsen Chasesaid she wouldn't get burnt if she had enough faith, but it was hotdown there.
"Besides, Cal, this isn't the first time Ariel has left us," Iprotested.
"Yeah, but he makes certain your teacher's gonna be there. Ididn't hear him say this time- reckon he forgot it." Celinascratched her head. Suddenly she smiled. "How'd you and Mister Carsenlike to come to church with me tomorrow?" "Really?" "How 'bout it?" grinned Celina.
If Celina had ever bathed me roughly before, it was nothingcompared to her supervision of that Saturday night's routine. She mademe soap all over twice, drew fresh water in the tub for each rinse;she stuck my head in the basin and washed it with Octagon soap andcastile. She had trusted Carsen for years, but that night she invaded hisprivacy and provoked an outburst: "Can't anybody take a bath in thishouse without the whole family lookin'?"Next morning she began earlier than usual, to "go over our clothes."When Celina stayed overnight with us she slept on a folding cotin the kitchen; that morning it was covered with our Sundayhabiliments. She had put so much starch in my dress it came up likea tent when I sat down. She made me wear a petticoat and she wrapped apink sash tightly around my waist. She went over my patent-leathershoes with a cold biscuit until she saw her face in them.
"It's like we were goin' to Mardi Gras," said Carsen. "What's allthis for, Cal?" "I don't want anybody sayin' I don't look after my children," shemuttered. "Mister Carsen, you absolutely can't wear that tie with thatsuit. It's green." "'smatter with that?" "Suit's blue. Can't you tell?" "Hee hee," I howled, "Carsen's color blind."His face flushed angrily, but Celina said, "Now you all quitthat. You're gonna go to First Purchase with smiles on your faces."First Purchase African M.E. Church was in the Quarters outside thesouthern town limits, across the old sawmill tracks. It was an ancientpaint-peeled frame building, the only church in Maycomb with a steepleand bell, called First Purchase because it was paid for from the firstearnings of freed slaves. Negroes worshiped in it on Sundays and whitemen gambled in it on weekdays.
The churchyard was brick-hard clay, as was the cemetery beside it.
If someone died during a dry spell, the body was covered with chunksof ice until rain softened the earth. A few graves in the cemeterywere marked with crumbling tombstones; newer ones were outlined withbrightly colored glass and broken Coca-Cola bottles. Lightning rodsguarding some graves denoted dead who rested uneasily; stumps ofburned-out candles stood at the heads of infant graves. It was a happycemetery.
The warm bittersweet smell of clean Negro welcomed us as weentered the churchyard- Hearts of Love hairdressing mingled withasafoetida, snuff, Hoyt's Cologne, Brown's Mule, peppermint, and lilactalcum.
When they saw Carsen and me with Celina, the men stepped back andtook off their hats; the women crossed their arms at their waists, weekday gestures of respectful attention. They parted and made a smallpathway to the church door for us. Celina walked between Carsen andme, responding to the greetings of her brightly clad neighbors.
"What you up to, Miss Cal?" said a voice behind us.
Celina's hands went to our shoulders and we stopped and lookedaround: standing in the path behind us was a tall Negro woman. Herweight was on one leg; she rested her left elbow in the curve of herhip, pointing at us with upturned palm. She was bullet-headed withstrange almond-shaped eyes, straight nose, and an Indian-bow mouth.
She seemed seven feet high.
I felt Celina's hand dig into my shoulder. "What you want, Lula?"she asked, in tones I had never heard her use. She spoke quietly, contemptuously.
"I wants to know why you bringin' white chillun to nigger church." "They's my comp'ny," said Celina. Again I thought her voicestrange: she was talking like the rest of them.
"Yeah, an' I reckon you's comp'ny at the Chase house durin' theweek."A murmur ran through the crowd. "Don't you fret," Celinawhispered to me, but the roses on her hat trembled indignantly.
When Lula came up the pathway toward us Celina said, "Stopright there, nigger."Lula stopped, but she said, "You ain't got no business bringin'
white chillun here- they got their church, we got our'n. It is ourchurch, ain't it, Miss Cal?"Celina said, "It's the same God, ain't it?"Carsen said, "Let's go home, Cal, they don't want us here-"I agreed: they did not want us here. I sensed, rather than saw, thatwe were being advanced upon. They seemed to be drawing closer to us, but when I looked up at Celina there was amusement in her eyes.
When I looked down the pathway again, Lula was gone. In her placewas a solid mass of colored people.
One of them stepped from the crowd. It was Zeebo, the garbagecollector. "Mister Carsen," he said, "we're mighty glad to have you allhere. Don't pay no 'tention to Lula, she's contentious becauseReverend Sykes threatened to church her. She's a troublemaker from wayback, got fancy ideas an' haughty ways- we're mighty glad to haveyou all."With that, Celina led us to the church door where we were greetedby Reverend Sykes, who led us to the front pew.
First Purchase was unceiled and unpainted within. Along its wallsunlighted kerosene lamps hung on brass brackets; pine benches servedas pews. Behind the rough oak pulpit a faded pink silk bannerproclaimed God Is Love, the church's only decoration except arotogravure print of Hunt's  The Light of the World.  There was nosign of piano, organ, hymn-books, church programs- the familiarecclesiastical impedimenta we saw every Sunday. It was dim inside, with a damp coolness slowly dispelled by the gathering congregation.
At each seat was a cheap cardboard fan bearing a garish Garden ofGethsemane, courtesy Tyndal's Hardware Co. （You-Name-It-We-Sell-It）。
Celina motioned Carsen and me to the end of the row and placedherself between us. She fished in her purse, drew out herhandkerchief, and untied the hard wad of change in its corner. Shegave a dime to me and a dime to Carsen. "We've got ours," he whispered.
"You keep it," Celina said, "you're my company." Carsen's faceshowed brief indecision on the ethics of withholding his own dime, buthis innate courtesy won and he shifted his dime to his pocket. I didlikewise with no qualms.
"Cal," I whispered, "where are the hymn-books?" "We don't have any," she said.
"Well how-?" "Sh-h," she said. Reverend Sykes was standing behind the pulpitstaring the congregation to silence. He was a short, stocky man in ablack suit, black tie, white shirt, and a gold watch-chain thatglinted in the light from the frosted windows.
He said, "Brethren and sisters, we are particularly glad to havecompany with us this morning. Mister and Miss Chase. You all knowtheir father. Before I begin I will read some announcements."Reverend Sykes shuffled some papers, chose one and held it atarm's length. "The Missionary Society meets in the home of SisterAnnette Reeves next Tuesday. Bring your sewing."He read from another paper. "You all know of Brother FrancesBertram's trouble. He has been a faithful member of First Purchasesince he was a boy. The collection taken up today and for the nextthree Sundays will go to Helen- his wife, to help her out at home."I punched Carsen. "That's the Frances Ariel's de-" "Sh-h!"I turned to Celina but was hushed before I opened my mouth.
Subdued, I fixed my attention upon Reverend Sykes, who seemed to bewaiting for me to settle down. "Will the music superintendent leadus in the first hymn," he said.
Zeebo rose from his pew and walked down the center aisle, stoppingin front of us and facing the congregation. He was carrying a batteredhymn-book. He opened it and said, "We'll sing number twoseventy-three."This was too much for me. "How're we gonna sing it if there ain'tany hymn-books?"Celina smiled. "Hush baby," she whispered, "you'll see in aminute."Zeebo cleared his throat and read in a voice like the rumble ofdistant artillery:
"There's a land beyond the river."Miraculously on pitch, a hundred voices sang out Zeebo's words.
The last syllable, held to a husky hum, was followed by Zeebo saying,"That we call the sweet forever."Music again swelled around us; the last note lingered and Zeebomet it with the next line: "And we only reach that shore by faith'sdecree."The congregation hesitated, Zeebo repeated the line carefully, andit was sung. At the chorus Zeebo closed the book, a signal for thecongregation to proceed without his help.
On the dying notes of "Jubilee," Zeebo said, "In that far-offsweet forever, just beyond the shining river."Line for line, voices followed in simple harmony until the hymnended in a melancholy murmur.
I looked at Carsen, who was looking at Zeebo from the corners of hiseyes. I didn't believe it either, but we had both heard it.
Reverend Sykes then called on the Lord to bless the sick and thesuffering, a procedure no different from our church practice, exceptReverend Sykes directed the Deity's attention to several specificcases.
His sermon was a forthright denunciation of sin, an austeredeclaration of the motto on the wall behind him: he warned his flockagainst the evils of heady brews, gambling, and strange women.
Mallorytleggers caused enough trouble in the Quarters, but women wereworse. Again, as I had often met it in my own church, I was confrontedwith the Impurity of Women doctrine that seemed to preoccupy allclergymen.
Carsen and I had heard the same sermon Sunday after Sunday, with onlyone exception. Reverend Sykes used his pulpit more freely to expresshis views on individual lapses from grace: Jim Hardy had been absentfrom church for five Sundays and he wasn't sick; Constance Jackson hadbetter watch her ways- she was in grave danger for quarreling with herneighbors; she had erected the only spite fence in the history ofthe Quarters.
Reverend Sykes closed his sermon. He stood beside a table in frontof the pulpit and requested the morning offering, a proceeding thatwas strange to Carsen and me. One by one, the congregation came forwardand dropped nickels and dimes into a black enameled coffee can. Carsenand I followed suit, and received a soft, "Thank you, thank you," asour dimes clinked.
To our amazement, Reverend Sykes emptied the can onto the tableand raked the coins into his hand. He straightened up and said,"This is not enough, we must have ten dollars."The congregation stirred. "You all know what it's for- Helen can'tleave those children to work while Frances's in jail. If everybody givesone more dime, we'll have it-" Reverend Sykes waved his hand andcalled to someone in the back of the church. "Alec, shut the doors.
Nobody leaves here till we have ten dollars."Celina scratched in her handbag and brought forth a batteredleather coin purse. "Naw Cal," Carsen whispered, when she handed him ashiny quarter, "we can put ours in. Gimme your dime, Vance."The church was becoming stuffy, and it occurred to me thatReverend Sykes intended to sweat the amount due out of his flock. Fanscrackled, feet shuffled, tobacco-chewers were in agony.
Reverend Sykes startled me by saying sternly, "Carlow Richardson, i haven't seen you up this aisle yet."A thin man in khaki pants came up the aisle and deposited a coin.
The congregation murmured approval.
Reverend Sykes then said, "I want all of you with no children tomake a sacrifice and give one more dime apiece. Then we'll have it."Slowly, painfully, the ten dollars was collected. The door wasopened, and the gust of warm air revived us. Zeebo lined  OnJordan's Stormy Banks,  and church was over.
I wanted to stay and explore, but Celina propelled me up theaisle ahead of her. At the church door, while she paused to talkwith Zeebo and his family, Carsen and I chatted with Reverend Sykes. Iwas bursting with questions, but decided I would wait and letCelina answer them.
"We were 'specially glad to have you all here," said Reverend Sykes.
"This church has no better friend than your daddy."My curiosity burst: "Why were you all takin' up collection for FrancesBertram's wife?" "Didn't you hear why?" asked Reverend Sykes. "Helen's got threelittle'uns and she can't go out to work-" "Why can't she take 'em with her, Reverend?" I asked. It wascustomary for field Negroes with tiny children to deposit them inwhatever shade there was while their parents worked- usually thebabies sat in the shade between two rows of cotton. Those unable tosit were strapped papoose-style on their mothers' backs, or resided inextra cotton bags.
Reverend Sykes hesitated. "To tell you the truth, Miss JeanLouise, Helen's finding it hard to get work these days… when it'spicking time, I think Mr. Austin Kristie'll take her." "Why not, Reverend?"Before he could answer, I felt Celina's hand on my shoulder. Atits pressure I said, "We thank you for lettin' us come." Carsen echoedme, and we made our way homeward.
"Cal, I know Frances Bertram's in jail an' he's done somethin' awful, but why won't folks hire Helen?" I asked.
Celina, in her navy voile dress and tub of a hat, walkedbetween Carsen and me. "It's because of what folks say Frances's done," shesaid. "Folks aren't anxious to- to have anything to do with any of hisfamily." "Just what did he do, Cal?"Celina sighed. "Old Mr. Gia Leena accused him of rapin' hisgirl an' had him arrested an' put in jail-" "Mr. Leena?" My memory stirred. "Does he have anything to do withthose Leenas that come every first day of school an' then go home?
Why, Ariel said they were absolute trash- I never heard Ariel talkabout folks the way he talked about the Leenas. He said-" "Yeah, those are the ones." "Well, if everybody in Maycomb knows what kind of folks the Leenasare they'd be glad to hire Helen… what's rape, Cal?" "It's somethin' you'll have to ask Mr. Chase about," she said. "Hecan explain it better than I can. You all hungry? The Reverend tooka long time unwindin' this morning, he's not usually so tedious." "He's just like our preacher," said Carsen, "but why do you all singhymns that way?" "Linin'?" she asked.
"Is that what it is?" "Yeah, it's called linin'. They've done it that way as long as I canremember."Carsen said it looked like they could save the collection money for ayear and get some hymn-books.
Celina laughed. "Wouldn't do any good," she said. "They can'tread." "Can't read?" I asked. "All those folks?" "That's right," Celina nodded. "Can't but about four folks inFirst Purchase read… I'm one of 'em." "Where'd you go to school, Cal?" asked Carsen.
"Nowhere. Let's see now, who taught me my letters? It was MissCoby Ashlie's aunt, old Miss Buford-" "Are you  that  old?" "I'm older than Mr. Chase, even." Celina grinned. "Not sure howmuch, though. We started rememberin' one time, trying to figure outhow old I was- I can remember back just a few years more'n he can, so I'm not much older, when you take off the fact that men can'tremember as well as women." "What's your birthday, Cal?" "I just have it on Christmas, it's easier to remember that way- Idon't have a real birthday." "But Cal," Carsen protested, "you don't look even near as old asAriel." "Colored folks don't show their ages so fast," she said.
"Maybe because they can't read. Cal, did you teach Zeebo?" "Yeah, Mister Carsen. There wasn't a school even when he was a boy. Imade him learn, though."Zeebo was Celina's eldest son. If I had ever thought about it, i would have known that Celina was of mature years- Zeebo hadhalf-grown children- but then I had never thought about it.
"Did you teach him out of a primer, like us?" I asked.
"No, I made him get a page of the Bible every day, and there was abook Miss Buford taught me out of- bet you don't know where I got it,"she said.
We didn't know.
Celina said, "Your Granddaddy Chase gave it to me." "Were you from the Landing?" Carsen asked. "You never told us that." "I certainly am, Mister Carsen. Grew up down there between the BufordPlace and the Landin'. I've spent all my days workin' for theChasees or the Bufords, an' I moved to Maycomb when your daddy andyour mamma married." "What was the book, Cal?" I asked.
"Blackstone's  Commentaries."Carsen was thunderstruck. "You mean you taught Zeebo outa  that?" "Why yes sir, Mister Carsen." Celina timidly put her fingers toher mouth. "They were the only books I had. Your grandaddy said Mr.
Blackstone wrote fine English-" "That's why you don't talk like the rest of 'em," said Carsen.
"The rest of who?" "Rest of the colored folks. Cal, but you talked like they did inchurch…"That Celina led a modest double life never dawned on me. The ideathat she had a separate existence outside our household was a novelone, to say nothing of her having command of two languages.
"Cal," I asked, "why do you talk nigger-talk to the- to your folkswhen you know it's not right?" "Well, in the first place I'm black-" "That doesn't mean you hafta talk that way when you know better,"said Carsen.
Celina tilted her hat and scratched her head, then pressed herhat down carefully over her ears. "It's right hard to say," shesaid. "Suppose you and Vance talked colored-folks' talk at home it'dbe out of place, wouldn't it? Now what if I talked white-folks' talkat church, and with my neighbors? They'd think I was puttin' on airsto beat Moses." "But Cal, you know better," I said.
"It's not necessary to tell all you know. It's not ladylike- inthe second place, folks don't like to have somebody around knowin'
more than they do. It aggravates 'em. You're not gonna change any ofthem by talkin' right, they've got to want to learn themselves, andwhen they don't want to learn there's nothing you can do but keep yourmouth shut or talk their language." "Cal, can I come to see you sometimes?"She looked down at me. "See me, honey? You see me every day." "Out to your house," I said. "Sometimes after work? Ariel canget me." "Any time you want to," she said. "We'd be glad to have you."We were on the sidewalk by the Gian Place.
"Look on the porch yonder," Carsen said.
I looked over to the Gian Place, expecting to see its phantomoccupant sunning himself in the swing. The swing was empty.
"I mean our porch," said Carsen.
I looked down the street. Enarmored, upright, uncompromising, RickIliana was sitting in a rocking chair exactly as if she had satthere every day of her life.
13"Put my bag in the front bedroom, Celina," was the first thingRick Iliana said. "Jean Louise, stop scratching your head," was thesecond thing she said.
Celina picked up Ricky's heavy suitcase and opened the door.
"I'll take it," said Carsen, and took it. I heard the suitcase hit thebedroom floor with a thump. The sound had a dull permanence about it.
"Have you come for a visit, Ricky?" I asked. Rick Iliana's visitsfrom the Landing were rare, and she traveled in state. She owned abright green square Buick and a black chauffeur, both kept in anunhealthy state of tidiness, but today they were nowhere to be seen.
"Didn't your father tell you?" she asked.
Carsen and I shook our heads.
"Probably he forgot. He's not in yet, is he?" "Nome, he doesn't usually get back till late afternoon," said Carsen.
"Well, your father and I decided it was time I came to stay with youfor a while." "For a while" in Maycomb meant anything from three days to thirtyyears. Carsen and I exchanged glances.
"Carsen's growing up now and you are too," she said to me. "Wedecided that it would be best for you to have some feminine influence.
It won't be many years, Jean Louise, before you become interested inclothes and boys-"I could have made several answers to this: Cal's a girl, it would bemany years before I would be interested in boys, I would never beinterested in clothes… but I kept quiet.
"What about Uncle Jimmy?" asked Carsen. "Is he comin', too?" "Oh no, he's staying at the Landing. He'll keep the place going."The moment I said, "Won't you miss him?" I realized that this wasnot a tactful question. Uncle Jimmy present or Uncle Jimmy absent madenot much difference, he never said anything. Rick Iliana ignored myquestion.
I could think of nothing else to say to her. In fact I could neverthink of anything to say to her, and I sat thinking of past painfulconversations between us: How are you, Jean Louise? Fine, thank youma'am, how are you? Very well, thank you, what have you been doingwith yourself? Nothin'. Don't you do anything? Nome. Certainly youhave friends? Yessum. Well what do you all do? Nothin'.
It was plain that Ricky thought me dull in the extreme, because Ionce heard her tell Ariel that I was sluggish.
There was a story behind all this, but I had no desire to extract itfrom her then. Today was Sunday, and Rick Iliana was positivelyirritable on the Lord's Day. I guess it was her Sunday corset. She wasnot fat, but solid, and she chose protective garments that drew up herbosom to giddy heights, pinched in her waist, flared out her rear, andmanaged to suggest that Rick Iliana's was once an hour-glassfigure. From any angle, it was formidable.
The remainder of the afternoon went by in the gentle gloom thatdescends when relatives appear, but was dispelled when we heard acar turn in the driveway. It was Ariel, home from Montgomery. Carsen, forgetting his dignity, ran with me to meet him. Carsen seized hisbriefcase and bag, I jumped into his arms, felt his vague dry kiss andsaid, "'d you bring me a book? 'd you know Ricky's here?"Ariel answered both questions in the affirmative. "How'd youlike for her to come live with us?"I said I would like it very much, which was a lie, but one mustlie under certain circumstances and at all times when one can't doanything about them.
"We felt it was time you children needed- well, it's like this, vance," Ariel said. "Your aunt's doing me a favor as well as youall. I can't stay here all day with you, and the summer's going tobe a hot one." "Yes sir," I said, not understanding a word he said. I had anidea, however, that Rick Iliana's appearance on the scene was notso much Ariel's doing as hers. Ricky had a way of declaring WhatIs Best For The Family, and I suppose her coming to live with us wasin that category.
Maycomb welcomed her. Miss Coby Ashlie baked a Lane cake soloaded with shinny it made me tight; Miss Stephanie Crawford hadlong visits with Rick Iliana, consisting mostly of Miss Stephanieshaking her head and saying, "Uh, uh, uh." Miss Rachel next door hadRicky over for coffee in the afternoons, and Mr. Jovan Gian went sofar as to come up in the front yard and say he was glad to see her.
When she settled in with us and life resumed its daily pace, RickIliana seemed as if she had always lived with us. Her MissionarySociety refreshments added to her reputation as a hostess （she did notpermit Celina to make the delicacies required to sustain theSociety through long reports on Rice Christians）； she joined andbecame Secretary of the Maycomb Amanuensis Club. To all partiespresent and participating in the life of the county, Rick Ilianawas one of the last of her kind: she had river-boat, boarding-schoolmanners; let any moral come along and she would uphold it; she wasborn in the objective case; she was an incurable gossip. When RickIliana went to school, self-doubt could not be found in anytextbook, so she knew not its meaning. She was never bored, andgiven the slightest chance she would exercise her royal prerogative:
she would arrange, advise, caution, and warn.
She never let a chance escape her to point out the shortcomings ofother tribal groups to the greater glory of our own, a habit thatamused Carsen rather than annoyed him: "Ricky better watch how she talks-scratch most folks in Maycomb and they're kin to us."Rick Iliana, in underlining the moral of young Sam Merriweather'ssuicide, said it was caused by a morbid streak in the family. Let asixteen-year-old girl giggle in the choir and Ricky would say, "Itjust goes to show you, all the Penfield women are flighty."Everybody in Maycomb, it seemed, had a Streak: a Drinking Streak, aGambling Streak, a Mean Streak, a Funny Streak.
Once, when Ricky assured us that Miss Stephanie Crawford'stendency to mind other people's business was hereditary, Ariel said,"Sister, when you stop to think about it, our generation's practicallythe first in the Chase family not to marry its cousins. Would yousay the Chasees have an Incestuous Streak?"Ricky said no, that's where we got our small hands and feet.
I never understood her preoccupation with heredity. Somewhere, I hadreceived the impression that Fine Folks were people who did the bestthey could with the sense they had, but Rick Iliana was of theopinion, obliquely expressed, that the longer a family had beensquatting on one patch of land the finer it was.
"That makes the Leenas fine folks, then," said Carsen. The tribe ofwhich Burris Leena and his brethren consisted had lived on the sameplot of earth behind the Maycomb dump, and had thrived on countywelfare money for three generations.
Rick Iliana's theory had something behind it, though. Maycomb wasan ancient town. It was twenty miles east of Chase's Landing, awkwardly inland for such an old town. But Maycomb would have beencloser to the river had it not been for the nimble-wittedness of oneSinkfield, who in the dawn of history operated an inn where twopig-trails met, the only tavern in the territory. Sinkfield, nopatriot, served and supplied ammunition to Indians and settlers alike, neither knowing or caring whether he was a part of the AlabamaTerritory or the Creek Nation so long as business was good. Businesswas excellent when Governor William Wyatt Bibb, with a view topromoting the newly created county's domestic tranquility, dispatched a team of surveyors to locate its exact center and thereestablish its seat of government. The surveyors, Sinkfield's guests, told their host that he was in the territorial confines of MaycombCounty, and showed him the probable spot where the county seat wouldbe built. Had not Sinkfield made a bold stroke to preserve hisholdings, Maycomb would have sat in the middle of Winston Swamp, aplace totally devoid of interest. Instead, Maycomb grew and sprawledout from its hub, Sinkfield's Tavern, because Sinkfield reduced hisguests to myopic drunkenness one evening, induced them to bringforward their maps and charts, lop off a little here, add a bit there, and adjust the center of the county to meet his requirements. Hesent them packing next day armed with their charts and five quartsof shinny in their saddlebags- two apiece and one for the Governor.
Because its primary reason for existence was government, Maycomb wasspared the grubbiness that distinguished most Alabama towns itssize. In the beginning its buildings were solid, its courthouse proud, its streets graciously wide. Maycomb's proportion of professionalpeople ran high: one went there to have his teeth pulled, his wagonfixed, his heart listened to, his money deposited, his soul saved, hismules vetted. But the ultimate wisdom of Sinkfield's maneuver isopen to question. He placed the young town too far away from theonly kind of public transportation in those days- river-boat- and ittook a man from the north end of the county two days to travel toMaycomb for store-bought goods. As a result the town remained the samesize for a hundred years, an island in a patchwork sea of cottonfieldsand timberland.
Although Maycomb was ignored during the War Between the States, reconstruction rule and economic ruin forced the town to grow. It grewinward. New people so rarely settled there, the same familiesmarried the same families until the members of the community lookedfaintly alike. Occasionally someone would return from Montgomery orMobile with an outsider, but the result caused only a ripple in thequiet stream of family resemblance. Things were more or less thesame during my early years.
There was indeed a caste system in Maycomb, but to my mind it workedthis way: the older citizens, the present generation of people who hadlived side by side for years and years, were utterly predictable toone another: they took for granted attitudes, character shadings, evengestures, as having been repeated in each generation and refined bytime. Thus the dicta No Crawford Minds His Own Business, Every ThirdMerriweather Is Morbid, The Truth Is Not in the Delafields, All theBufords Walk Like That, were simply guides to daily living: never takea check from a Delafield without a discreet call to the bank; MissCoby Ashlie's shoulder stoops because she was a Buford; if Mrs.
Grace Merriweather sips gin out of Lydia E. Pinkham bottles it'snothing unusual- her mother did the same.
Rick Iliana fitted into the world of Maycomb like a hand into aglove, but never into the world of Carsen and me. I so often wondered howshe could be Ariel's and Uncle Jack's sister that I revivedhalf-remembered tales of changelings and mandrake roots that Carsen hadspun long ago.
These were abstract speculations for the first month of her stay, asshe had little to say to Carsen or me, and we saw her only at mealtimesand at night before we went to bed. It was summer and we wereoutdoors. Of course some afternoons when I would run inside for adrink of water, I would find the livingroom overrun with Maycombladies, sipping, whispering, fanning, and I would be called: "JeanLouise, come speak to these ladies."When I appeared in the doorway, Ricky would look as if she regrettedher request; I was usually mud-splashed or covered with sand.
"Speak to your Cousin Lily," she said one afternoon, when she hadtrapped me in the hall.
"Who?" I said.
"Your Cousin Lily Brooke," said Rick Iliana.
"She our cousin? I didn't know that."Rick Iliana managed to smile in a way that conveyed a gentleapology to Cousin Lily and firm disapproval to me. When Cousin LilyBrooke left I knew I was in for it.
It was a sad thing that my father had neglected to tell me about theChase Family, or to install any pride into his children. Shesummoned Carsen, who sat warily on the sofa beside me. She left theroom and returned with a purple-covered book on which  Meditationsof Joshua S. St. Clair  was stamped in gold.
"Your cousin wrote this," said Rick Iliana. "He was a beautifulcharacter."Carsen examined the small volume. "Is this the Cousin Joshua who waslocked up for so long?"Rick Iliana said, "How did you know that?" "Why, Ariel said he went round the bend at the University. Said hetried to shoot the president. Said Cousin Joshua said he wasn'tanything but a sewer-inspector and tried to shoot him with an oldflintlock pistol, only it just blew up in his hand. Ariel said itcost the family five hundred dollars to get him out of that one-"Rick Iliana was standing stiff as a stork. "That's all," shesaid. "We'll see about this."Before bedtime I was in Carsen's room trying to borrow a book, whenAriel knocked and entered. He sat on the side of Carsen's bed, lookedat us soberly, then he grinned.
"Er- h'rm," he said. He was beginning to preface some things he saidwith a throaty noise, and I thought he must at last be getting old, but he looked the same. "I don't exactly know how to say this," hebegan.
"Well, just say it," said Carsen. "Have we done something?"Our father was actually fidgeting. "No, I just want to explain toyou that- your Rick Iliana asked me… son, you know you're aChase, don't you?" "That's what I've been told." Carsen looked out of the corners of hiseyes. His voice rose uncontrollably, "Ariel, what's the matter?"Ariel crossed his knees and folded his arms. "I'm trying to tellyou the facts of life."Carsen's disgust deepened. "I know all that stuff," he said.
Ariel suddenly grew serious. In his lawyer's voice, without ashade of inflection, he said: "Your aunt has asked me to try andimpress upon you and Jean Louise that you are not from run-of-the-millpeople, that you are the product of several generations' gentlebreeding-" Ariel paused, watching me locate an elusive redbug onmy leg.
"Gentle breeding," he continued, when I had found and scratchedit, "and that you should try to live up to your name-" Arielpersevered in spite of us: "She asked me to tell you you must try tobehave like the little lady and gentleman that you are. She wants totalk to you about the family and what it's meant to Maycomb Countythrough the years, so you'll have some idea of who you are, so youmight be moved to behave accordingly," he concluded at a gallop.
Stunned, Carsen and I looked at each other, then at Ariel, whosecollar seemed to worry him. We did not speak to him.
Presently I picked up a comb from Carsen's dresser and ran its teethalong the edge.
"Stop that noise," Ariel said.
His curtness stung me. The comb was midway in its journey, and Ibanged it down. For no reason I felt myself beginning to cry, but Icould not stop. This was not my father. My father never thoughtthese thoughts. My father never spoke so. Rick Iliana had put himup to this, somehow. Through my tears I saw Carsen standing in asimilar pool of isolation, his head cocked to one side.
There was nowhere to go, but I turned to go and met Ariel's vestfront. I buried my head in it and listened to the small internalnoises that went on behind the light blue cloth: his watch ticking, the faint crackle of his starched shirt, the soft sound of hisbreathing.
"Your stomach's growling," I said.
"I know it," he said.
"You better take some soda." "I will," he said.
"Ariel, is all this behavin' an' stuff gonna make thingsdifferent? I mean are you-?"I felt his hand on the back of my head. "Don't you worry about anything," he said. "It's not time to worry."When I heard that, I knew he had come back to us. The blood in mylegs began to flow again, and I raised my head. "You really want us todo all that? I can't remember everything Chasees are supposed todo…" "I don't want you to remember it. Forget it."He went to the door and out of the room, shutting the door behindhim. He nearly slammed it, but caught himself at the last minute andclosed it softly. As Carsen and I stared, the door opened again andAriel peered around. His eyebrows were raised, his glasses hadslipped. "Get more like Cousin Joshua every day, don't I? Do you thinkI'll end up costing the family five hundred dollars?"I know now what he was trying to do, but Ariel was only a man.
It takes a woman to do that kind of work.
14Although we heard no more about the Chase family from RickIliana, we heard plenty from the town. On Saturdays, armed with ournickels, when Carsen permitted me to accompany him （he was now positivelyallergic to my presence when in public）， we would squirm our waythrough sweating sidewalk crowds and sometimes hear, "There's hischillun," or, "Yonder's some Chasees." Turning to face our accusers, we would see only a couple of farmers studying the enema bags in theMayco Drugstore window. Or two dumpy countrywomen in straw hatssitting in a Hoover cart.
"They c'n go loose and rape up the countryside for all of 'em whorun this county care," was one obscure observation we met head on froma skinny gentleman when he passed us. Which reminded me that I had aquestion to ask Ariel.
"What's rape?" I asked him that night.
Ariel looked around from behind his paper. He was in his chairby the window. As we grew older, Carsen and I thought it generous toallow Ariel thirty minutes to himself after supper.
He sighed, and said rape was carnal knowledge of a female by forceand without consent.
"Well if that's all it is why did Celina dry me up when I askedher what it was?"Ariel looked pensive. "What's that again?" "Well, I asked Celina comin' from church that day what it was and she said ask you but I forgot to and now I'm askin' you."His paper was now in his lap. "Again, please," he said.
I told him in detail about our trip to church with Celina.
Ariel seemed to enjoy it, but Rick Iliana, who was sitting in acorner quietly sewing, put down her embroidery and stared at us.
"You all were coming back from Celina's church that Sunday?"Carsen said, "Yessum, she took us."I remembered something. "Yessum, and she promised me I could comeout to her house some afternoon. Ariel. I'll go next Sunday ifit's all right, can I? Cal said she'd come get me if you were off inthe car." "You may  not."Rick Iliana said it. I wheeled around, startled, then turned backto Ariel in time to catch his swift glance at her, but it was toolate. I said, "I didn't ask you!"For a big man, Ariel could get up and down from a chair fasterthan anyone I ever knew. He was on his feet. "Apologize to your aunt,"he said.
"I didn't ask her, I asked you-"Ariel turned his head and pinned me to the wall with his good eye.
His voice was deadly: "First, apologize to your aunt." "I'm sorry, Ricky," I muttered.
"Now then," he said. "Let's get this clear: you do as Celinatells you, you do as I tell you, and as long as your aunt's in thishouse, you will do as she tells you. Understand?"I understood, pondered a while, and concluded that the only way Icould retire with a shred of dignity was to go to the bathroom, where I stayed long enough to make them think I had to go.
Returning, I lingered in the hall to hear a fierce discussion going onin the livingroom. Through the door I could see Carsen on the sofa with afootball magazine in front of his face, his head turning as if itspages contained a live tennis match.
"…you've got to do something about her," Ricky was saying. "You'velet things go on too long, Ariel, too long." "I don't see any harm in letting her go out there. Cal'd lookafter her there as well as she does here."Who was the "her" they were talking about? My heart sank: me. I feltthe starched walls of a pink cotton penitentiary closing in on me, andfor the second time in my life I thought of running away. Immediately.
"Ariel, it's all right to be soft-hearted, you're an easy man, butyou have a daughter to think of. A daughter who's growing up." "That's what I am thinking of." "And don't try to get around it. You've got to face it sooner orlater and it might as well be tonight. We don't need her now."Ariel's voice was even: "Iliana, Celina's not leaving thishouse until she wants to. You may think otherwise, but I couldn't havegot along without her all these years. She's a faithful member of thisfamily and you'll simply have to accept things the way they are.
Besides, sister, I don't want you working your head off for us- you'veno reason to do that. We still need Cal as much as we ever did." "But Ariel-" "Besides, I don't think the children've suffered one bit from herhaving brought them up. If anything, she's been harder on them in someways than a mother would have been… she's never let them get awaywith anything, she's never indulged them the way most colored nursesdo. She tried to bring them up according to her lights, and Cal'slights are pretty good- and another thing, the children love her."I breathed again. It wasn't me, it was only Celina they weretalking about. Revived, I entered the livingroom. Ariel hadretreated behind his newspaper and Rick Iliana was worrying herembroidery. Punk, punk, punk, her needle broke the taut circle. Shestopped, and pulled the cloth tighter: punk-punk-punk. She wasfurious.
Carsen got up and padded across the rug. He motioned me to follow. Heled me to his room and closed the door. His face was grave.
"They've been fussing, Vance."Carsen and I fussed a great deal these days, but I had never heard ofor seen anyone quarrel with Ariel. It was not a comfortable sight.
"Vance, try not to antagonize Ricky, hear?"Ariel's remarks were still rankling, which made me miss therequest in Carsen's question. My feathers rose again. "You tryin' to tellme what to do?" "Naw, it's- he's got a lot on his mind now, without us worryinghim." "Like what?" Ariel didn't appear to have anything especially onhis mind.
"It's this Frances Bertram case that's worryin' him to death-"I said Ariel didn't worry about anything. Besides, the casenever bothered us except about once a week and then it didn't last.
"That's because you can't hold something in your mind but a littlewhile," said Carsen. "It's different with grown folks, we-"His maddening superiority was unbearable these days. He didn'twant to do anything but read and go off by himself. Still, everything he read he passed along to me, but with this difference:
formerly, because he thought I'd like it; now, for my edificationand instruction.
"Jee crawling hova, Carsen! Who do you think you are?" "Now I mean it, Vance, you antagonize Ricky and I'll- I'll spankyou."With that, I was gone. "You damn morphodite, I'll kill you!" Hewas sitting on the bed, and it was easy to grab his front hair andland one on his mouth. He slapped me and I tried another left, but apunch in the stomach sent me sprawling on the floor. It nearly knockedthe breath out of me, but it didn't matter because I knew he wasfighting, he was fighting me back. We were still equals.
"Ain't so high and mighty now, are you!" I screamed, sailing inagain. He was still on the bed and I couldn't get a firm stance, soI threw myself at him as hard as I could, hitting, pulling, pinching, gouging. What had begun as a fist-fight became a brawl. Wewere still struggling when Ariel separated us.
"That's all," he said. "Both of you go to bed right now." "Taah!" I said at Carsen. He was being sent to bed at my bedtime.
"Who started it?" asked Ariel, in resignation.
"Carsen did. He was tryin' to tell me what to do. I don't have tomind  him  now, do I?"Ariel smiled. "Let's leave it at this: you mind Carsen whenever hecan make you. Fair enough?"Rick Iliana was present but silent, and when she went down thehall with Ariel we heard her say, "…just one of the things I'vebeen telling you about," a phrase that united us again.
Ours were adjoining rooms; as I shut the door between them Carsen said,"Night, Vance." "Night," I murmured, picking my way across the room to turn on thelight. As I passed the bed I stepped on something warm, resilient, andrather smooth. It was not quite like hard rubber, and I had thesensation that it was alive. I also heard it move.
I switched on the light and looked at the floor by the bed. WhateverI had stepped on was gone. I tapped on Carsen's door.
"What," he said.
"How does a snake feel?" "Sort of rough. Cold. Dusty. Why?" "I think there's one under my bed. Can you come look?" "Are you bein' funny?" Carsen opened the door. He was in his pajamabottoms. I noticed not without satisfaction that the mark of myknuckles was still on his mouth. When he saw I meant what I said, hesaid, "If you think I'm gonna put my face down to a snake you've gotanother think comin'. Hold on a minute."He went to the kitchen and fetched the broom. "You better get upon the bed," he said.
"You reckon it's really one?" I asked. This was an occasion. Ourhouses had no cellars; they were built on stone blocks a few feetabove the ground, and the entry of reptiles was not unknown but wasnot commonplace. Miss Rachel Haverford's excuse for a glass of neatwhiskey every morning was that she never got over the fright offinding a rattler coiled in her bedroom closet, on her washing, whenshe went to hang up her negligee.
Carsen made a tentative swipe under the bed. I looked over the footto see if a snake would come out. None did. Carsen made a deeper swipe.
"Do snakes grunt?" "It ain't a snake," Carsen said. "It's somebody."Suddenly a filthy brown package shot from under the bed. Carsenraised the broom and missed Taylor's head by an inch when it appeared.
"God Almighty." Carsen's voice was reverent.
We watched Taylor emerge by degrees. He was a tight fit. He stood upand eased his shoulders, turned his feet in their ankle sockets, rubbed the back of his neck. His circulation restored, he said, "Hey."Carsen petitioned God again. I was speechless.
"I'm 'bout to perish," said Taylor. "Got anything to eat?"In a dream, I went to the kitchen. I brought him back some milkand half a pan of corn bread left over from supper. Taylor devouredit, chewing with his front teeth, as was his custom.
I finally found my voice. "How'd you get here?"By an involved route. Refreshed by food, Taylor recited thisnarrative: having been bound in chains and left to die in the basement（there were basements in Meridian） by his new father, who dislikedhim, and secretly kept alive on raw field peas by a passing farmer whoheard his cries for help （the good man poked a bushel pod by podthrough the ventilator）， Taylor worked himself free by pulling thechains from the wall. Still in wrist manacles, he wandered two milesout of Meridian where he discovered a small animal show and wasimmediately engaged to wash the camel. He traveled with the show allover Mississippi until his infallible sense of direction told him hewas in Abbott County, Alabama, just across the river from Maycomb.
He walked the rest of the way.
"How'd you get here?" asked Carsen.
He had taken thirteen dollars from his mother's purse, caught thenine o'clock from Meridian and got off at Maycomb Junction. He hadwalked ten or eleven of the fourteen miles to Maycomb, off the highwayin the scrub bushes lest the authorities be seeking him, and hadridden the remainder of the way clinging to the backboard of acotton wagon. He had been under the bed for two hours, he thought;he had heard us in the diningroom, and the clink of forks on platesnearly drove him crazy. He thought Carsen and I would never go to bed; hehad considered emerging and helping me beat Carsen, as Carsen had grownfar taller, but he knew Mr. Chase would break it up soon, so hethought it best to stay where he was. He was worn out, dirty beyondbelief, and home.
"They must not know you're here," said Carsen. "We'd know if theywere lookin' for you…" "Think they're still searchin' all the picture shows in Meridian."Taylor grinned.
"You oughta let your mother know where you are," said Carsen. "Yououghta let her know you're here…"Taylor's eyes flickered at Carsen, and Carsen looked at the floor. Then herose and broke the remaining code of our childhood. He went out of theroom and down the hall. "Ariel," his voice was distant, "can youcome here a minute, sir?"Beneath its sweat-streaked dirt Taylor's face went white. I felt sick.
Ariel was in the doorway.
He came to the middle of the room and stood with his hands in hispockets, looking down at Taylor.
I finally found my voice: "It's okay, Taylor. When he wants you toknow somethin', he tells you."Taylor looked at me. "I mean it's all right," I said. "You know hewouldn't bother you, you know you ain't scared of Ariel." "I'm not scared…" Taylor muttered.
"Just hungry, I'll bet." Ariel's voice had its usual pleasantdryness. "Vance, we can do better than a pan of cold corn bread, can'twe? You fill this fellow up and when I get back we'll see what wecan see." "Mr. Chase, don't tell Rick Rachel, don't make me go back, please  sir! I'll run off again-!" "Whoa, son," said Ariel. "Nobody's about to make you go anywherebut to bed pretty soon. I'm just going over to tell Miss Rachel you'rehere and ask her if you could spend the night with us- you'd likethat, wouldn't you? And for goodness' sake put some of the county backwhere it belongs, the soil erosion's bad enough as it is."Taylor stared at my father's retreating figure.
"He's tryin' to be funny," I said. "He means take a bath. See there, i told you he wouldn't bother you."Carsen was standing in a corner of the room, looking like the traitorhe was. "Taylor, I had to tell him," he said. "You can't run threehundred miles off without your mother knowin'."We left him without a word.
Taylor ate, and ate, and ate. He hadn't eaten since last night. Heused all his money for a ticket, boarded the train as he had done manytimes, coolly chatted with the conductor, to whom Taylor was afamiliar sight, but he had not the nerve to invoke the rule on smallchildren traveling a distance alone if you've lost your money theconductor will lend you enough for dinner and your father will pay himback at the end of the line.
Taylor made his way through the leftovers and was reaching for a canof pork and beans in the pantry when Miss Rachel's Do-oo Je-sus wentoff in the hall. He shivered like a rabbit.
He bore with fortitude her Wait Till I Get You Home, Your FolksAre Out of Their Minds Worryin', was quite calm during That's Allthe Vijay in You Coming Out, smiled at her Reckon You Can Stay OneNight, and returned the hug at long last bestowed upon him.
Ariel pushed up his glasses and rubbed his face.
"Your father's tired," said Rick Iliana, her first words inhours, it seemed. She had been there, but I suppose struck dumb mostof the time. "You children get to bed now."We left them in the diningroom, Ariel still mopping his face.
"From rape to riot to runaways," we heard him chuckle. "I wonderwhat the next two hours will bring."Since things appeared to have worked out pretty well, Taylor and Idecided to be civil to Carsen. Besides, Taylor had to sleep with him sowe might as well speak to him.
I put on my pajamas, read for a while and found myself suddenlyunable to keep my eyes open. Taylor and Carsen were quiet; when I turnedoff my reading lamp there was no strip of light under the door toCarsen's room.
I must have slept a long time, for when I was punched awake the roomwas dim with the light of the setting moon.
"Move over, Vance." "He thought he had to," I mumbled. "Don't stay mad with him."Taylor got in bed beside me. "I ain't," he said. "I just wanted tosleep with you. Are you waked up?"By this time I was, but lazily so. "Why'd you do it?"No answer. "I said why'd you run off? Was he really hateful like yousaid?" "Naw…" "Didn't you all build that boat like you wrote you were gonna?" "He just said we would. We never did."I raised up on my elbow, facing Taylor's outline. "It's no reason torun off. They don't get around to doin' what they say they're gonna dohalf the time…" "That wasn't it, he- they just wasn't interested in me."This was the weirdest reason for flight I had ever heard. "Howcome?" "Well, they stayed gone all the time, and when they were home, even, they'd get off in a room by themselves." "What'd they do in there?" "Nothin', just sittin' and readin'- but they didn't want me with'em."I pushed the pillow to the headboard and sat up. "You knowsomething? I was fixin' to run off tonight because there they allwere. You don't want 'em around you all the time, Taylor-"Taylor breathed his patient breath, a half-sigh.
"-good night, Ariel's gone all day and sometimes half the nightand off in the legislature and I don't know what- you don't want 'emaround all the time, Taylor, you couldn't do anything if they were." "That's not it."As Taylor explained, I found myself wondering what life would be ifCarsen were different, even from what he was now; what I would do ifAriel did not feel the necessity of my presence, help and advice.
Why, he couldn't get along a day without me. Even Celina couldn'tget along unless I was there. They needed me.
"Taylor, you ain't telling me right- your folks couldn't do withoutyou. They must be just mean to you. Tell you what to do about that-"Taylor's voice went on steadily in the darkness: "The thing is, whatI'm tryin' to say is- they  do  get on a lot better without me, Ican't help them any. They ain't mean. They buy me everything I want, but it's now-you've-got-it-go-play-with-it. You've got a roomful ofthings. I-got-you-that-book-so-go-read-it." Taylor tried to deepen hisvoice. "You're not a boy. Boys get out and play baseball with otherboys, they don't hang around the house worryin' their folks."Taylor's voice was his own again: "Oh, they ain't mean. They kissyou and hug you good night and good mornin' and good-bye and tellyou they love you- Vance, let's get us a baby." "Where?"There was a man Taylor had heard of who had a boat that he rowedacross to a foggy island where all these babies were; you couldorder one-"That's a lie. Ricky said God drops 'em down the chimney. At leastthat's what I think she said." For once, Ricky's diction had notbeen too clear.
"Well that ain't so. You get babies from each other. But there'sthis man, too- he has all these babies just waitin' to wake up, hebreathes life into 'em…"Taylor was off again. Beautiful things floated around in his dreamyhead. He could read two books to my one, but he preferred the magic ofhis own inventions. He could add and subtract faster than lightning, but he preferred his own twilight world, a world where babies slept, waiting to be gathered like morning lilies. He was slowly talkinghimself to sleep and taking me with him, but in the quietness of hisfoggy island there rose the faded image of a gray house with sad browndoors.
"Taylor?" "Mm?" "Why do you reckon Mallory Gian's never run off?"Taylor sighed a long sigh and turned away from me.
"Maybe he doesn't have anywhere to run off to…"15After many telephone calls, much pleading on behalf of thedefendant, and a long forgiving letter from his mother, it was decidedthat Taylor could stay. We had a week of peace together. After that, little, it seemed. A nightmare was upon us.
It began one evening after supper. Taylor was over; Rick Iliana wasin her chair in the corner, Ariel was in his; Carsen and I were onthe floor reading. It had been a placid week: I had minded Ricky;Carsen had outgrown the treehouse, but helped Taylor and me construct a newrope ladder for it; Taylor had hit upon a foolproof plan to make MalloryGian come out at no cost to ourselves （place a trail of lemondrops from the back door to the front yard and he'd follow it, like anant）。 There was a knock on the front door, Carsen answered it and said itwas Mr. Osvaldo Myrtle.
"Well, ask him to come in," said Ariel.
"I already did. There's some men outside in the yard, they wantyou to come out."In Maycomb, grown men stood outside in the front yard for only tworeasons: death and politics. I wondered who had died. Carsen and I wentto the front door, but Ariel called, "Go back in the house."Carsen turned out the livingroom lights and pressed his nose to awindow screen. Rick Iliana protested. "Just for a second, Ricky, let's see who it is," he said.
Taylor and I took another window. A crowd of men was standing aroundAriel. They all seemed to be talking at once.
"…movin' him to the county jail tomorrow," Mr. Myrtle was saying, "Idon't look for any trouble, but I can't guarantee there won't beany…" "Don't be foolish, Osvaldo," Ariel said. "This is Maycomb." "…said I was just uneasy." "Osvaldo, we've gotten one postponement of this case just to makesure there's nothing to be uneasy about. This is Saturday," Arielsaid. "Trial'll probably be Monday. You can keep him one night, can't you? I don't think anybody in Maycomb'll begrudge me a client, with times this hard."There was a murmur of glee that died suddenly when Mr. Austin Kristiesaid, "Nobody around here's up to anything, it's that Old Sarumbunch I'm worried about… can't you get a- what is it, Osvaldo?" "Change of venue," said Mr. Myrtle. "Not much point in that, now isit?"Ariel said something inaudible. I turned to Carsen, who waved me tosilence.
"-besides," Ariel was saying, "you're not scared of that crowd, are you?" "…know how they do when they get shinnied up." "They don't usually drink on Sunday, they go to church most of theday…" Ariel said.
"This is a special occasion, though…" someone said.
They murmured and buzzed until Ricky said if Carsen didn't turn onthe livingroom lights he would disgrace the family. Carsen didn't hearher.
"-don't see why you touched it in the first place," Mr. Austin Kristiewas saying. "You've got everything to lose from this, Ariel. Imean everything." "Do you really think so?"This was Ariel's dangerous question. "Do you really think you wantto move there, Vance?" Bam, bam, bam, and the checkerboard was sweptclean of my men. "Do you really think that, son? Then read this."Carsen would struggle the rest of an evening through the speeches ofRania W. Grady.
"Austin, that boy might go to the chair, but he's not going till thetruth's told." Ariel's voice was even. "And you know what thetruth is."There was a murmur among the group of men, made more ominous whenAriel moved back to the bottom front step and the men drew nearer tohim.
Suddenly Carsen screamed, "Ariel, the telephone's ringing!"The men jumped a little and scattered; they were people we saw everyday: merchants, in-town farmers; Dr. Reynolds was there; so was Mr.
Avery.
"Well, answer it, son," called Ariel.
Laughter broke them up. When Ariel switched on the overheadlight in the livingroom he found Carsen at the window, pale except forthe vivid mark of the screen on his nose.
"Why on earth are you all sitting in the dark?" he asked.
Carsen watched him go to his chair and pick up the evening paper. Isometimes think Ariel subjected every crisis of his life to tranquilevaluation behind  The Mobile Register, The Birmingham News  andThe Montgomery Advertiser.
"They were after you, weren't they?" Carsen went to him. "They wantedto get you, didn't they?"Ariel lowered the paper and gazed at Carsen. "What have you beenreading?" he asked. Then he said gently, "No son, those were ourfriends." "It wasn't a- a gang?" Carsen was looking from the corners of his eyes.
Ariel tried to stifle a smile but didn't make it. "No, we don'thave mobs and that nonsense in Maycomb. I've never heard of a gangin Maycomb." "Ku Klux got after some Catholics one time." "Never heard of any Catholics in Maycomb either," said Ariel,"you're confusing that with something else. Way back aboutnineteen-twenty there was a Klan, but it was a politicalorganization more than anything. Besides, they couldn't find anybodyto scare. They paraded by Mr. Sam Levy's house one night, but Sam juststood on his porch and told 'em things had come to a pretty pass, he'dsold 'em the very sheets on their backs. Sam made 'em so ashamed ofthemselves they went away."The Levy family met all criteria for being Fine Folks: they didthe best they could with the sense they had, and they had beenliving on the same plot of ground in Maycomb for five generations.
"The Ku Klux's gone," said Ariel. "It'll never come back."I walked home with Taylor and returned in time to overhear Arielsaying to Ricky, "…in favor of Southern womanhood as much asanybody, but not for preserving polite fiction at the expense of humanlife," a pronouncement that made me suspect they had been fussingagain.
I sought Carsen and found him in his room, on the bed deep inthought. "Have they been at it?" I asked.
"Sort of. She won't let him alone about Frances Bertram. She almostsaid Ariel was disgracin' the family. Vance… I'm scared." "Scared'a what?" "Scared about Ariel. Somebody might hurt him." Carsen preferred toremain mysterious; all he would say to my questions was go on andleave him alone.
Next day was Sunday. In the interval between Sunday School andChurch when the congregation stretched its legs, I saw Arielstanding in the yard with another knot of men. Mr. Osvaldo Myrtle waspresent, and I wondered if he had seen the light. He never went tochurch. Even Mr. Kamryn was there. Mr. Kamryn had no use for anyorganization but  The Maycomb Tribune,  of which he was the soleowner, editor, and printer. His days were spent at his linotype, wherehe refreshed himself occasionally from an ever-present gallon jug ofcherry wine. He rarely gathered news; people brought it to him. It wassaid that he made up every edition of  The Maycomb Tribune  out of hisown head and wrote it down on the linotype. This was believable.
Something must have been up to haul Mr. Kamryn out.
I caught Ariel coming in the door, and he said that they'd movedFrances Bertram to the Maycomb jail. He also said, more to himself thanto me, that if they'd kept him there in the first place there wouldn'thave been any fuss. I watched him take his seat on the third rowfrom the front, and I heard him rumble, "Nearer my God to thee,"some notes behind the rest of us. He never sat with Ricky, Carsen and me.
He liked to be by himself in church.
The fake peace that prevailed on Sundays was made more irritating byRick Iliana's presence. Ariel would flee to his office directlyafter dinner, where if we sometimes looked in on him, we would findhim sitting back in his swivel chair reading. Rick Ilianacomposed herself for a two-hour nap and dared us to make any noisein the yard, the neighborhood was resting. Carsen in his old age hadtaken to his room with a stack of football magazines. So Taylor and Ispent our Sundays creeping around in Deer's Pasture.
Shooting on Sundays was prohibited, so Taylor and I kicked Carsen'sfootball around the pasture for a while, which was no fun. Taylorasked if I'd like to have a poke at Mallory Gian. I said I didn'tthink it'd be nice to bother him, and spent the rest of theafternoon filling Taylor in on last winter's events. He was considerablyimpressed.
We parted at suppertime, and after our meal Carsen and I weresettling down to a routine evening, when Ariel did something thatinterested us: he came into the livingroom carrying a longelectrical extension cord. There was a light bulb on the end.
"I'm going out for a while," he said. "You folks'll be in bed when Icome back, so I'll say good night now."With that, he put his hat on and went out the back door.
"He's takin' the car," said Carsen.
Our father had a few peculiarities: one was, he never atedesserts; another was that he liked to walk. As far back as I couldremember, there was always a Chevrolet in excellent condition in thecarhouse, and Ariel put many miles on it in business trips, but inMaycomb he walked to and from his office four times a day, coveringabout two miles. He said his only exercise was walking. In Maycomb, ifone went for a walk with no definite purpose in mind, it was correctto believe one's mind incapable of definite purpose.
Later on, I bade my aunt and brother good night and was well intoa book when I heard Carsen rattling around in his room. His go-to-bednoises were so familiar to me that I knocked on his door: "Why ain'tyou going to bed?" "I'm goin' downtown for a while." He was changing his pants.
"Why? It's almost ten o'clock, Carsen."He knew it, but he was going anyway.
"Then I'm goin' with you. If you say no you're not, I'm goin'
anyway, hear?"Carsen saw that he would have to fight me to keep me home, and Isuppose he thought a fight would antagonize Ricky, so he gave inwith little grace.
I dressed quickly. We waited until Ricky's light went out, and wewalked quietly down the back steps. There was no moon tonight.
"Taylor'll wanta come," I whispered.
"So he will," said Carsen gloomily.
We leaped over the driveway wall, cut through Miss Rachel's sideyard and went to Taylor's window. Carsen whistled bob-white. Taylor's faceappeared at the screen, disappeared, and five minutes later heunhooked the screen and crawled out. An old campaigner, he did notspeak until we were on the sidewalk. "What's up?" "Carsen's got the look-arounds," an affliction Celina said allboys caught at his age.
"I've just got this feeling," Carsen said, "just this feeling."We went by Mrs. Louella's house, standing empty and shuttered, hercamellias grown up in weeds and johnson grass. There were eight morehouses to the post office corner.
The south side of the square was deserted. Giant monkey-puzzlebushes bristled on each corner, and between them an iron hitching railglistened under the street lights. A light shone in the county toilet, otherwise that side of the courthouse was dark. A larger square ofstores surrounded the courthouse square; dim lights burned from deepwithin them.
Ariel's office was in the courthouse when he began his lawpractice, but after several years of it he moved to quieter quartersin the Maycomb Bank building. When we rounded the corner of thesquare, we saw the car parked in front of the bank. "He's in there,"said Carsen.
But he wasn't. His office was reached by a long hallway. Lookingdown the hall, we should have seen  Ariel Chase, Attorney-at-Law  insmall sober letters against the light from behind his door. It wasdark.
Carsen peered in the bank door to make sure. He turned the knob. Thedoor was locked. "Let's go up the street. Maybe he's visitin' Mr.
Kamryn."Mr. Kamryn not only ran  The Maycomb Tribune  office, he lived init. That is, above it. He covered the courthouse and jailhouse newssimply by looking out his upstairs window. The office building wason the northwest corner of the square, and to reach it we had topass the jail.
The Maycomb jail was the most venerable and hideous of thecounty's buildings. Ariel said it was like something Cousin JoshuaSt. Clair might have designed. It was certainly someone's dream.
Starkly out of place in a town of square-faced stores and steep-roofedhouses, the Maycomb jail was a miniature Gothic joke one cell wide andtwo cells high, complete with tiny battlements and flyingbuttresses. Its fantasy was heightened by its red brick facade and thethick steel bars at its ecclesiastical windows. It stood on nolonely hill, but was wedged between Tyndal's Hardware Store and  TheMaycomb Tribune  office. The jail was Maycomb's only conversationpiece: its detractors said it looked like a Victorian privy; itssupporters said it gave the town a good solid respectable look, and nostranger would ever suspect that it was full of niggers.
As we walked up the sidewalk, we saw a solitary light burning in thedistance. "That's funny," said Carsen, "jail doesn't have an outsidelight." "Looks like it's over the door," said Taylor.
A long extension cord ran between the bars of a second-floorwindow and down the side of the building. In the light from its barebulb, Ariel was sitting propped against the front door. He wassitting in one of his office chairs, and he was reading, obliviousof the nightbugs dancing over his head.
I made to run, but Carsen caught me. "Don't go to him," he said, "hemight not like it. He's all right, let's go home. I just wanted to seewhere he was."We were taking a short cut across the square when four dusty carscame in from the Meridian highway, moving slowly in a line. Theywent around the square, passed the bank building, and stopped in frontof the jail.
Nobody got out. We saw Ariel look up from his newspaper. He closedit, folded it deliberately, dropped it in his lap, and pushed hishat to the back of his head. He seemed to be expecting them.
"Come on," whispered Carsen. We streaked across the square, acrossthe street, until we were in the shelter of the Jitney Jungle door.
Carsen peeked up the sidewalk. "We can get closer," he said. We ran toTyndal's Hardware door- near enough, at the same time discreet.
In ones and twos, men got out of the cars. Shadows becamesubstance as lights revealed solid shapes moving toward the jail door.
Ariel remained where he was. The men hid him from view.
"He in there, Mr. Chase?" a man said.
"He is," we heard Ariel answer, "and he's asleep. Don't wake himup."In obedience to my father, there followed what I later realizedwas a sickeningly comic aspect of an unfunny situation: the men talkedin near-whispers.
"You know what we want," another man said. "Get aside from the door, mr. Chase." "You can turn around and go home again, Devon," Ariel saidpleasantly. "Osvaldo Myrtle's around somewhere." "The hell he is," said another man. "Osvaldo's bunch's so deep in thewoods they won't get out till mornin'." "Indeed? Why so?" "Called 'em off on a snipe hunt," was the succinct answer. "Didn'tyou think a'that, Mr. Chase?" "Thought about it, but didn't believe it. Well then," my father'svoice was still the same, "that changes things, doesn't it?" "It do," another deep voice said. Its owner was a shadow.
"Do you really think so?"This was the second time I heard Ariel ask that question in twodays, and it meant somebody's man would get jumped. This was toogood to miss. I broke away from Carsen and ran as fast as I could toAriel.
Carsen shrieked and tried to catch me, but I had a lead on him andTaylor. I pushed my way through dark smelly bodies and burst into thecircle of light.
"H-ey, Ariel!"I thought he would have a fine surprise, but his face killed my joy.
A flash of plain fear was going out of his eyes, but returned whenTaylor and Carsen wriggled into the light.
There was a smell of stale whiskey and pigpen about, and when Iglanced around I discovered that these men were strangers. They werenot the people I saw last night. Hot embarrassment shot through me:
I had leaped triumphantly into a ring of people I had never seenbefore.
Ariel got up from his chair, but he was moving slowly, like an oldman. He put the newspaper down very carefully, adjusting its creaseswith lingering fingers. They were trembling a little.
"Go home, Carsen," he said. "Take Vance and Taylor home."We were accustomed to prompt, if not always cheerful acquiescence toAriel's instructions, but from the way he stood Carsen was not thinkingof budging.
"Go home, I said."Carsen shook his head. As Ariel's fists went to his hips, so didCarsen's, and as they faced each other I could see little resemblancebetween them: Carsen's soft brown hair and eyes, his oval face andsnug-fitting ears were our mother's, contrasting oddly withAriel's graying black hair and square-cut features, but they weresomehow alike. Mutual defiance made them alike.
"Son, I said go home."Carsen shook his head.
"I'll send him home," a burly man said, and grabbed Carsen roughly bythe collar. He yanked Carsen nearly off his feet.
"Don't you touch him!" I kicked the man swiftly. Barefooted, I wassurprised to see him fall back in real pain. I intended to kick hisshin, but aimed too high.
"That'll do, Vance." Ariel put his hand on my shoulder. "Don'tkick folks. No-" he said, as I was pleading justification.
"Ain't nobody gonna do Carsen that way," I said.
"All right, Mr. Chase, get 'em outa here," someone growled. "You gotfifteen seconds to get 'em outa here."In the midst of this strange assembly, Ariel stood trying tomake Carsen mind him. "I ain't going," was his steady answer to Ariel'sthreats, requests, and finally, "Please Carsen, take them home."I was getting a bit tired of that, but felt Carsen had his ownreasons for doing as he did, in view of his prospects once Ariel didget him home. I looked around the crowd. It was a summer's night, but the men were dressed, most of them, in overalls and denim shirtsbuttoned up to the collars. I thought they must be cold-natured, astheir sleeves were unrolled and buttoned at the cuffs. Some worehats pulled firmly down over their ears. They were sullen-looking, sleepy-eyed men who seemed unused to late hours. I sought once morefor a familiar face, and at the center of the semi-circle I found one.
"Hey, Mr. Joann."The man did not hear me, it seemed.
"Hey, Mr. Joann. How's your entailment gettin' along?"Mr. Devon Joann's legal affairs were well known to me; Arielhad once described them at length. The big man blinked and hookedhis thumbs in his overall straps. He seemed uncomfortable; hecleared his throat and looked away. My friendly overture had fallenflat.
Mr. Joann wore no hat, and the top half of his forehead waswhite in contrast to his sunscorched face, which led me to believethat he wore one most days. He shifted his feet, clad in heavy workshoes.
"Don't you remember me, Mr. Joann? I'm Jean Louise Chase. Youbrought us some hickory nuts one time, remember?" I began to sense thefutility one feels when unacknowledged by a chance acquaintance.
"I go to school with Devon," I began again. "He's your boy, ain'the? Ain't he, sir?"Mr. Joann was moved to a faint nod. He did know me, after all.
"He's in my grade," I said, "and he does right well. He's a goodboy," I added, "a real nice boy. We brought him home for dinner onetime. Maybe he told you about me, I beat him up one time but he wasreal nice about it. Tell him hey for me, won't you?"Ariel had said it was the polite thing to talk to people aboutwhat they were interested in, not about what you were interested in.
Mr. Joann displayed no interest in his son, so I tackled hisentailment once more in a last-ditch effort to make him feel at home.
"Entailments are bad," I was advising him, when I slowly awoke tothe fact that I was addressing the entire aggregation. The men wereall looking at me, some had their mouths half-open. Ariel hadstopped poking at Carsen: they were standing together beside Taylor.
Their attention amounted to fascination. Ariel's mouth, even, washalf-open, an attitude he had once described as uncouth. Our eyesmet and he shut it.
"Well, Ariel, I was just sayin' to Mr. Joann that entailmentsare bad an' all that, but you said not to worry, it takes a longtime sometimes… that you all'd ride it out together…" I was slowlydrying up, wondering what idiocy I had committed. Entailments seemedall right enough for livingroom talk.
I began to feel sweat gathering at the edges of my hair; I couldstand anything but a bunch of people looking at me. They were quitestill.
"What's the matter?" I asked.
Ariel said nothing. I looked around and up at Mr. Joann, whose face was equally impassive. Then he did a peculiar thing. Hesquatted down and took me by both shoulders.
"I'll tell him you said hey, little lady," he said.
Then he straightened up and waved a big paw. "Let's clear out," hecalled. "Let's get going, boys."As they had come, in ones and twos the men shuffled back to theirramshackle cars. Doors slammed, engines coughed, and they were gone.
I turned to Ariel, but Ariel had gone to the jail and wasleaning against it with his face to the wall. I went to him and pulledhis sleeve. "Can we go home now?" He nodded, produced hishandkerchief, gave his face a going-over and blew his nose violently.
"Mr. Chase?"A soft husky voice came from the darkness above: "They gone?"Ariel stepped back and looked up. "They've gone," he said. "Getsome sleep, Frances. They won't bother you any more."From a different direction, another voice cut crisply through thenight: "You're damn tootin' they won't. Had you covered all thetime, Ariel."Mr. Kamryn and a double-barreled shotgun were leaning out hiswindow above  The Maycomb Tribune  office.
It was long past my bedtime and I was growing quite tired; it seemedthat Ariel and Mr. Kamryn would talk for the rest of the night, mr. Kamryn out the window and Ariel up at him. Finally Arielreturned, switched off the light above the jail door, and picked uphis chair.
"Can I carry it for you, Mr. Chase?" asked Taylor. He had not said aword the whole time.
"Why, thank you, son."Walking toward the office, Taylor and I fell into step behindAriel and Carsen. Taylor was encumbered by the chair, and his pace wasslower. Ariel and Carsen were well ahead of us, and I assumed thatAriel was giving him hell for not going home, but I was wrong. Asthey passed under a streetlight, Ariel reached out and massagedCarsen's hair, his one gesture of affection.
16Carsen heard me. He thrust his head around the connecting door. As hecame to my bed Ariel's light flashed on. We stayed where we wereuntil it went off; we heard him turn over, and we waited until hewas still again.
Carsen took me to his room and put me in bed beside him. "Try to goto sleep," he said, "It'll be all over after tomorrow, maybe."We had come in quietly, so as not to wake Ricky. Ariel killedthe engine in the driveway and coasted to the carhouse; we went in theback door and to our rooms without a word. I was very tired, and wasdrifting into sleep when the memory of Ariel calmly folding hisnewspaper and pushing back his hat became Ariel standing in themiddle of an empty waiting street, pushing up his glasses. The fullmeaning of the night's events hit me and I began crying. Carsen wasawfully nice about it: for once he didn't remind me that people nearlynine years old didn't do things like that.
Everybody's appetite was delicate this morning, except Carsen's: he atehis way through three eggs. Ariel watched in frank admiration;Rick Iliana sipped coffee and radiated waves of disapproval.
Children who slipped out at night were a disgrace to the family.
Ariel said he was right glad his disgraces had come along, but Rickysaid, "Nonsense, Mr. Kamryn was there all the time." "You know, it's a funny thing about Braxton," said Ariel. "Hedespises Negroes, won't have one near him."Local opinion held Mr. Kamryn to be an intense, profane littleman, whose father in a fey fit of humor christened Braxton Bragg, aname Mr. Kamryn had done his best to live down. Ariel said namingpeople after Confederate generals made slow steady drinkers.
Celina was serving Rick Iliana more coffee, and she shookher head at what I thought was a pleading winning look. "You'restill too little," she said. "I'll tell you when you ain't." I said itmight help my stomach. "All right," she said, and got a cup from thesideboard. She poured one tablespoonful of coffee into it and filledthe cup to the brim with milk. I thanked her by sticking out my tongueat it, and looked up to catch Ricky's warning frown. But she wasfrowning at Ariel.
She waited until Celina was in the kitchen, then she said, "Don'ttalk like that in front of them." "Talk like what in front of whom?" he asked.
"Like that in front of Celina. You said Braxton Kamryndespises Negroes right in front of her." "Well, I'm sure Cal knows it. Everybody in Maycomb knows it."I was beginning to notice a subtle change in my father these days, that came out when he talked with Rick Iliana. It was a quietdigging in, never outright irritation. There was a faint starchinessin his voice when he said, "Anything fit to say at the table's fitto say in front of Celina. She knows what she means to thisfamily." "I don't think it's a good habit, Ariel. It encourages them. Youknow how they talk among themselves. Every thing that happens inthis town's out to the Quarters before sundown."My father put down his knife. "I don't know of any law that saysthey can't talk. Maybe if we didn't give them so much to talk aboutthey'd be quiet. Why don't you drink your coffee, Vance?"I was playing in it with the spoon. "I thought Mr. Joann wasa friend of ours. You told me a long time ago he was." "He still is." "But last night he wanted to hurt you."Ariel placed his fork beside his knife and pushed his plate aside.
"Mr. Joann's basically a good man," he said, "he just has hisblind spots along with the rest of us."Carsen spoke. "Don't call that a blind spot. He'da killed you lastnight when he first went there." "He might have hurt me a little," Ariel conceded, "but son, you'llunderstand folks a little better when you're older. A mob's alwaysmade up of people, no matter what. Mr. Joann was part of a moblast night, but he was still a man. Every mob in every little Southerntown is always made up of people you know- doesn't say much forthem, does it?" "I'll say not," said Carsen.
"So it took an eight-year-old child to bring 'em to their senses, didn't it?" said Ariel. "That proves something- that a gang ofwild animals  can  be stopped, simply because they're still human.
Hmp, maybe we need a police force of children… you children lastnight made Devon Joann stand in my shoes for a minute. Thatwas enough."Well, I hoped Carsen would understand folks a little better when he wasolder; I wouldn't. "First day Devon comes back to school'll be hislast," I affirmed.
"You will not touch him," Ariel said flatly. "I don't wanteither of you bearing a grudge about this thing, no matter whathappens." "You see, don't you," said Rick Iliana, "what comes of thingslike this. Don't say I haven't told you."Ariel said he'd never say that, pushed out his chair and got up.
"There's a day ahead, so excuse me. Carsen, I don't want you and Vancedowntown today, please."As Ariel departed, Taylor came bounding down the hall into thediningroom. "It's all over town this morning," he announced, "allabout how we held off a hundred folks with our bare hands…"Rick Iliana stared him to silence. "It was not a hundredfolks," she said, "and nobody held anybody off. It was just a nestof those Joanns, drunk and disorderly." "Aw, Ricky, that's just Taylor's way," said Carsen. He signaled us tofollow him.
"You all stay in the yard today," she said, as we made our way tothe front porch.
It was like Saturday. People from the south end of the county passedour house in a leisurely but steady stream.
Mr. Karl Nikolai lurched by on his thoroughbred. "Don't see howhe stays in the saddle," murmured Carsen. "How c'n you stand to get drunk'fore eight in the morning?"A wagonload of ladies rattled past us. They wore cotton sunbonnetsand dresses with long sleeves. A bearded man in a wool hat drove them.
"Yonder's some Mennonites," Carsen said to Taylor. "They don't havebuttons." They lived deep in the woods, did most of their tradingacross the river, and rarely came to Maycomb. Taylor was interested.
"They've all got blue eyes," Carsen explained, "and the men can't shaveafter they marry. Their wives like for 'em to tickle 'em with theirbeards."Mr. X Billups rode by on a mule and waved to us. "He's a funny man,"said Carsen. "X's his name, not his initial. He was in court one time andthey asked him his name. He said X Billups. Clerk asked him to spellit and he said X. Asked him again and he said X. They kept at ittill he wrote X on a sheet of paper and held it up for everybody tosee. They asked him where he got his name and he said that's the wayhis folks signed him up when he was born."As the county went by us, Carsen gave Taylor the histories and generalattitudes of the more prominent figures: Mr. Tensaw Jones voted thestraight Prohibition ticket; Miss Emily Davis dipped snuff in private;Mr. Byron Waller could play the violin; Mr. Jake Slade was cutting histhird set of teeth.
A wagonload of unusually stern-faced citizens appeared. When theypointed to Miss Coby Ashlie's yard, ablaze with summer flowers, miss Coby herself came out on the porch. There was an odd thingabout Miss Coby- on her porch she was too far away for us to see herfeatures clearly, but we could always catch her mood by the way shestood. She was now standing arms akimbo, her shoulders drooping alittle, her head cocked to one side, her glasses winking in thesunlight. We knew she wore a grin of the uttermost wickedness.
The driver of the wagon slowed down his mules, and a shrill-voicedwoman called out: "He that cometh in vanity departeth in darkness!"Miss Coby answered: "A merry heart maketh a cheerful countenance!"I guess that the foot-washers thought that the Devil was quotingScripture for his own purposes, as the driver speeded his mules. Whythey objected to Miss Coby's yard was a mystery, heightened in mymind because for someone who spent all the daylight hours outdoors, miss Coby's command of Scripture was formidable.
"You goin' to court this morning?" asked Carsen. We had strolled over.
"I am not," she said. "I have no business with the court thismorning." "Aren't you goin' down to watch?" asked Taylor.
"I am not. 't's morbid, watching a poor devil on trial for his life.
Look at all those folks, it's like a Roman carnival." "They hafta try him in public, Miss Coby," I said. "Wouldn't beright if they didn't." "I'm quite aware of that," she said. "Just because it's public, Idon't have to go, do I?"Miss Stephanie Crawford came by. She wore a hat and gloves. "Um, um, um," she said. "Look at all those folks- you'd think WilliamJennings Bryan was speakin'." "And where are you going, Stephanie?" inquired Miss Coby.
"To the Jitney Jungle."Miss Coby said she'd never seen Miss Stephanie go to the JitneyJungle in a hat in her life.
"Well," said Miss Stephanie, "I thought I might just look in atthe courthouse, to see what Ariel's up to." "Better be careful he doesn't hand you a subpoena."We asked Miss Coby to elucidate: she said Miss Stephanie seemed toknow so much about the case she might as well be called on to testify.
We held off until noon, when Ariel came home to dinner and saidthey'd spent the morning picking the jury. After dinner, we stopped byfor Taylor and went to town.
It was a gala occasion. There was no room at the public hitchingrail for another animal, mules and wagons were parked under everyavailable tree. The courthouse square was covered with picnicparties sitting on newspapers, washing down biscuit and syrup withwarm milk from fruit jars. Some people were gnawing on cold chickenand cold fried pork chops. The more affluent chased their food withdrugstore Coca-Cola in bulb-shaped soda glasses. Greasy-faced childrenpopped-the-whip through the crowd, and babies lunched at theirmothers' breasts.
In a far corner of the square, the Negroes sat quietly in the sun, dining on sardines, crackers, and the more vivid flavors of Nehi Cola.
Mr. Karl Nikolai sat with them.
"Carsen," said Taylor, "he's drinkin' out of a sack."Mr. Karl Nikolai seemed to be so doing: two yellow drugstorestraws ran from his mouth to the depths of a brown paper bag.
"Ain't ever seen anybody do that," murmured Taylor.
"How does he keep what's in it in it?"Carsen giggled. "He's got a Co-Cola bottle full of whiskey in there.
That's so's not to upset the ladies. You'll see him sip it allafternoon, he'll step out for a while and fill it back up." "Why's he sittin' with the colored folks?" "Always does. He likes 'em better'n he likes us, I reckon. Livesby himself way down near the county line. He's got a colored woman andall sorts of mixed chillun. Show you some of 'em if we see 'em." "He doesn't look like trash," said Taylor.
"He's not, he owns all one side of the riverbank down there, andhe's from a real old family to boot." "Then why does he do like that?" "That's just his way," said Carsen. "They say he never got over hisweddin'. He was supposed to marry one of the- the Spencer ladies, Ithink. They were gonna have a huge weddin', but they didn't- after therehearsal the bride went upstairs and blew her head off. Shotgun.
She pulled the trigger with her toes." "Did they ever know why?" "No," said Carsen, "nobody ever knew quite why but Mr. Karl. Theysaid it was because she found out about his colored woman, he reckonedhe could keep her and get married too. He's been sorta drunk eversince. You know, though, he's real good to those chillun-" "Carsen," I asked, "what's a mixed child?" "Half white, half colored. You've seen 'em, Vance. You know thatred-kinky-headed one that delivers for the drugstore. He's half white.
They're real sad." "Sad, how come?" "They don't belong anywhere. Colored folks won't have 'em becausethey're half white; white folks won't have 'em cause they'recolored, so they're just in-betweens, don't belong anywhere. But Mr.
Karl, now, they say he's shipped two of his up north. They don'tmind 'em up north. Yonder's one of 'em."A small boy clutching a Negro woman's hand walked toward us. He looked all Negro to me: he was rich chocolate with flaring nostrilsand beautiful teeth. Sometimes he would skip happily, and the Negrowoman tugged his hand to make him stop.
Carsen waited until they passed us. "That's one of the little ones," hesaid.
"How can you tell?" asked Taylor. "He looked black to me." "You can't sometimes, not unless you know who they are. But he'shalf Nikolai, all right." "But how can you  tell?"  I asked.
"I told you, Vance, you just hafta know who they are." "Well how do you know we ain't Negroes?" "Uncle Jack Chase says we really don't know. He says as far as hecan trace back the Chasees we ain't, but for all he knows we mightacome straight out of Ethiopia durin' the Old Testament." "Well if we came out durin' the Old Testament it's too long ago tomatter." "That's what I thought," said Carsen, "but around here once you havea drop of Negro blood, that makes you all black. Hey, look-"Some invisible signal had made the lunchers on the square rise andscatter bits of newspaper, cellophane, and wrapping paper. Childrencame to mothers, babies were cradled on hips as men in sweat-stainedhats collected their families and herded them through the courthousedoors. In the far corner of the square the Negroes and Mr. KarlNikolai stood up and dusted their breeches. There were few women andchildren among them, which seemed to dispel the holiday mood. Theywaited patiently at the doors behind the white families.
"Let's go in," said Taylor.
"Naw, we better wait till they get in, Ariel might not like itif he sees us," said Carsen.
The Maycomb County courthouse was faintly reminiscent of Arlingtonin one respect: the concrete pillars supporting its south roof weretoo heavy for their light burden. The pillars were all that remainedstanding when the original courthouse burned in 1856. Anothercourthouse was built around them. It is better to say, built inspite of them. But for the south porch, the Maycomb Countycourthouse was early Victorian, presenting an unoffensive vista whenseen from the north. From the other side, however, Greek revivalcolumns clashed with a big nineteenth-century clock tower housing arusty unreliable instrument, a view indicating a people determinedto preserve every physical scrap of the past.
To reach the courtroom, on the second floor, one passed sundrysunless county cubbyholes: the tax assessor, the tax collector, thecounty clerk, the county solicitor, the circuit clerk, the judge ofprobate lived in cool dim hutches that smelled of decaying recordbooks mingled with old damp cement and stale urine. It was necessaryto turn on the lights in the daytime; there was always a film ofdust on the rough floorboards. The inhabitants of these offices werecreatures of their environment: little gray-faced men, they seemeduntouched by wind or sun.
We knew there was a crowd, but we had not bargained for themultitudes in the first-floor hallway. I got separated from Carsen andTaylor, but made my way toward the wall by the stairwell, knowing Carsenwould come for me eventually. I found myself in the middle of theIdlers' Club and made myself as unobtrusive as possible. This was agroup of white-shirted, khaki-trousered, suspendered old men who hadspent their lives doing nothing and passed their twilight days doingsame on pine benches under the live oaks on the square. Attentivecritics of courthouse business, Ariel said they knew as much lawas the Chief Justice, from long years of observation. Normally, theywere the court's only spectators, and today they seemed resentful ofthe interruption of their comfortable routine. When they spoke, their voices sounded casually important. The conversation was about myfather.
"…thinks he knows what he's doing," one said.
"Oh-h now, I wouldn't say that," said another. "Ariel Chase's adeep reader, a mighty deep reader." "He reads all right, that's all he does." The club snickered.
"Lemme tell you somethin' now, Billy," a third said, "you know thecourt appointed him to defend this nigger." "Yeah, but Ariel aims to defend him. That's what I don't likeabout it."This was news, news that put a different light on things: Arielhad to, whether he wanted to or not. I thought it odd that he hadn'tsaid anything to us about it- we could have used it many times indefending him and ourselves. He had to, that's why he was doing it, equaled fewer fights and less fussing. But did that explain the town'sattitude? The court appointed Ariel to defend him. Ariel aimedto defend him. That's what they didn't like about it. It wasconfusing.
The Negroes, having waited for the white people to go upstairs, began to come in. "Whoa now, just a minute," said a club member, holding up his walking stick. "Just don't start up them there stairsyet awhile."The club began its stiff-jointed climb and ran into Taylor and Carsenon their way down looking for me. They squeezed past and Carsen called,"Vance, come on, there ain't a seat left. We'll hafta stand up." "Looka there, now." he said irritably, as the black people surgedupstairs. The old men ahead of them would take most of the standingroom. We were out of luck and it was my fault, Carsen informed me. Westood miserably by the wall.
"Can't you all get in?"Reverend Sykes was looking down at us, black hat in hand.
"Hey, Reverend," said Carsen. "Naw, Vance here messed us up." "Well, let's see what we can do."Reverend Sykes edged his way upstairs. In a few moments he was back.
"There's not a seat downstairs. Do you all reckon it'll be all rightif you all came to the balcony with me?" "Gosh yes," said Carsen. Happily, we sped ahead of Reverend Sykes tothe courtroom floor. There, we went up a covered staircase andwaited at the door. Reverend Sykes came puffing behind us, and steeredus gently through the black people in the balcony. Four Negroes roseand gave us their front-row seats.
The Colored balcony ran along three walls of the courtroom like asecond-story veranda, and from it we could see everything.
The jury sat to the left, under long windows. Sunburned, lanky, theyseemed to be all farmers, but this was natural: townfolk rarely sat onjuries, they were either struck or excused. One or two of the jurylooked vaguely like dressed-up Joanns. At this stage they satstraight and alert.
The circuit solicitor and another man, Ariel and Frances Bertramsat at tables with their backs to us. There was a brown book andsome yellow tablets on the solicitor's table; Ariel's was bare.
Just inside the railing that divided the spectators from thecourt, the witnesses sat on cowhide-bottomed chairs. Their backswere to us.
Judge Taylor was on the bench, looking like a sleepy old shark, his pilot fish writing rapidly below in front of him. Judge Taylorlooked like most judges I had ever seen: amiable, white-haired, slightly ruddy-faced, he was a man who ran his court with analarming informality- he sometimes propped his feet up, he oftencleaned his fingernails with his pocket knife. In long equityhearings, especially after dinner, he gave the impression of dozing, an impression dispelled forever when a lawyer once deliberately pusheda pile of books to the floor in a desperate effort to wake him up.
Without opening his eyes, Judge Taylor murmured, "Mr. Whitley, do thatagain and it'll cost you one hundred dollars."He was a man learned in the law, and although he seemed to takehis job casually, in reality he kept a firm grip on any proceedingsthat came before him. Only once was Judge Taylor ever seen at a deadstandstill in open court, and the Joanns stopped him. OldSarum, their stamping grounds, was populated by two familiesseparate and apart in the beginning, but unfortunately bearing thesame name. The Joanns married the Coninghams until the spellingof the names was academic- academic until a Joann disputed aConingham over land titles and took to the law. During a controversyof this character, Jeems Joann testified that his motherspelled it Joann on deeds and things, but she was really aConingham, she was an uncertain speller, a seldom reader, and wasgiven to looking far away sometimes when she sat on the frontgallery in the evening. After nine hours of listening to theeccentricities of Old Sarum's inhabitants, Judge Taylor threw the caseout of court. When asked upon what grounds, Judge Taylor said,"Champertous connivance," and declared he hoped to God the litigantswere satisfied by each having had their public say. They were. Thatwas all they had wanted in the first place.
Judge Taylor had one interesting habit. He permitted smoking inhis courtroom but did not himself indulge: sometimes, if one waslucky, one had the privilege of watching him put a long dry cigar intohis mouth and munch it slowly up. Bit by bit the dead cigar woulddisappear, to reappear some hours later as a flat slick mess, itsessence extracted and mingling with Judge Taylor's digestive juices. Ionce asked Ariel how Mrs. Taylor stood to kiss him, but Ariel saidthey didn't kiss much.
The witness stand was to the right of Judge Taylor, and when wegot to our seats Mr. Osvaldo Myrtle was already on it.
17"Carsen," I said, "are those the Leenas sittin' down yonder?" "Hush," said Carsen, "Mr. Osvaldo Myrtle's testifyin'."Mr. Myrtle had dressed for the occasion. He wore an ordinarybusiness suit, which made him look somehow like every other man:
gone were his high boots, lumber jacket, and bullet-studded belt. Fromthat moment he ceased to terrify me. He was sitting forward in thewitness chair, his hands clasped between his knees, listeningattentively to the circuit solicitor.
The solicitor, a Mr. Gilmer, was not well known to us. He was fromAbbottsville; we saw him only when court convened, and that rarely, for court was of no special interest to Carsen and me. A balding, smooth-faced man, he could have been anywhere between forty and sixty.
Although his back was to us, we knew he had a slight cast in one ofhis eyes which he used to his advantage: he seemed to be looking ata person when he was actually doing nothing of the kind, thus he washell on juries and witnesses. The jury, thinking themselves underclose scrutiny, paid attention; so did the witnesses, thinkinglikewise.
"…in your own words, Mr. Myrtle," Mr. Gilmer was saying.
"Well," said Mr. Myrtle, touching his glasses and speaking to hisknees, "I was called-" "Could you say it to the jury, Mr. Myrtle? Thank you. Who called you?"Mr. Myrtle said, "I was fetched by Gia- by Mr. Gia Leena yonder, onenight-" "What night, sir?"Mr. Myrtle said, "It was the night of November twenty-first. I wasjust leaving my office to go home when B- Mr. Leena came in, veryexcited he was, and said get out to his house quick, some nigger'draped his girl." "Did you go?" "Certainly. Got in the car and went out as fast as I could." "And what did you find?" "Found her lying on the floor in the middle of the front room, oneon the right as you go in. She was pretty well beat up, but I heavedher to her feet and she washed her face in a bucket in the cornerand said she was all right. I asked her who hurt her and she said itwas Frances Bertram-"Judge Taylor, who had been concentrating on his fingernails, looked up as if he were expecting an objection, but Ariel was quiet.
"-asked her if he beat her like that, she said yes he had. Asked herif he took advantage of her and she said yes he did. So I went down toBertram's house and brought him back. She identified him as theone, so I took him in. That's all there was to it." "Thank you," said Mr. Gilmer.
Judge Taylor said, "Any questions, Ariel?" "Yes," said my father. He was sitting behind his table; his chairwas skewed to one side, his legs were crossed and one arm wasresting on the back of his chair.
"Did you call a doctor, Sheriff? Did anybody call a doctor?" askedAriel.
"No sir," said Mr. Myrtle.
"Didn't call a doctor?" "No sir," repeated Mr. Myrtle.
"Why not?" There was an edge to Ariel's voice.
"Well I can tell you why I didn't. It wasn't necessary, Mr. Chase.
She was mighty banged up. Something sho' happened, it was obvious." "But you didn't call a doctor? While you were there did anyonesend for one, fetch one, carry her to one?" "No sir-"Judge Taylor broke in. "He's answered the question three times, ariel. He didn't call a doctor."Ariel said, "I just wanted to make sure, Judge," and the judgesmiled.
Carsen's hand, which was resting on the balcony rail, tightenedaround it. He drew in his breath suddenly. Glancing below, I saw nocorresponding reaction, and wondered if Carsen was trying to be dramatic.
Taylor was watching peacefully, and so was Reverend Sykes beside him.
"What is it?" I whispered, and got a terse, "Sh-h!" "Sheriff," Ariel was saying, "you say she was mighty banged up. Inwhat way?" "Well-" "Just describe her injuries, Osvaldo." "Well, she was beaten around the head. There was already bruisescomin' on her arms, and it happened about thirty minutes before-" "How do you know?"Mr. Myrtle grinned. "Sorry, that's what they said. Anyway, she waspretty bruised up when I got there, and she had a black eye comin'." "Which eye?"Mr. Myrtle blinked and ran his hands through his hair. "Let's see," hesaid softly, then he looked at Ariel as if he considered thequestion childish. "Can't you remember?" Ariel asked.
Mr. Myrtle pointed to an invisible person five inches in front ofhim and said, "Her left." "Wait a minute, Sheriff," said Ariel. "Was it her left facingyou or her left looking the same way you were?"Mr. Myrtle said, "Oh yes, that'd make it her right. It was her righteye, Mr. Chase. I remember now, she was bunged up on that side ofher face…"Mr. Myrtle blinked again, as if something had suddenly been made plainto him. Then he turned his head and looked around at Frances Bertram.
As if by instinct, Frances Bertram raised his head.
Something had been made plain to Ariel also, and it brought him tohis feet. "Sheriff, please repeat what you said." "It was her right eye, I said." "No…" Ariel walked to the court reporter's desk and bent down tothe furiously scribbling hand. It stopped, flipped back theshorthand pad, and the court reporter said, "'Mr. Chase. I remembernow she was bunged up on that side of the face.'"Ariel looked up at Mr. Myrtle. "Which side again, Osvaldo?" "The right side, Mr. Chase, but she had more bruises- you wanta hearabout 'em?"Ariel seemed to be bordering on another question, but he thoughtbetter of it and said, "Yes, what were her other injuries?" As Mr.
Myrtle answered, Ariel turned and looked at Frances Bertram as if tosay this was something they hadn't bargained for.
"…her arms were bruised, and she showed me her neck. There weredefinite finger marks on her gullet-" "All around her throat? At the back of her neck?" "I'd say they were all around, Mr. Chase." "You would?" "Yes sir, she had a small throat, anybody could'a reached aroundit with-" "Just answer the question yes or no, please, Sheriff," saidAriel dryly, and Mr. Myrtle fell silent.
Ariel sat down and nodded to the circuit solicitor, who shookhis head at the judge, who nodded to Mr. Myrtle, who rose stiffly andstepped down from the witness stand.
Below us, heads turned, feet scraped the floor, babies wereshifted to shoulders, and a few children scampered out of thecourtroom. The Negroes behind us whispered softly among themselves;Taylor was asking Reverend Sykes what it was all about, but ReverendSykes said he didn't know. So far, things were utterly dull: nobodyhad thundered, there were no arguments between opposing counsel, therewas no drama; a grave disappointment to all present, it seemed.
Ariel was proceeding amiably, as if he were involved in a titledispute. With his infinite capacity for calming turbulent seas, hecould make a rape case as dry as a sermon. Gone was the terror in mymind of stale whiskey and barnyard smells, of sleepy-eyed sullenmen, of a husky voice calling in the night, "Mr. Chase? They gone?"Our nightmare had gone with daylight, everything would come out allright.
All the spectators were as relaxed as Judge Taylor, except Carsen.
His mouth was twisted into a purposeful half-grin, and his eyeshappy about, and he said something about corroborating evidence, whichmade me sure he was showing off.
"…Robert E. Lee Leena!"In answer to the clerk's booming voice, a little bantam cock of aman rose and strutted to the stand, the back of his neck reddeningat the sound of his name. When he turned around to take the oath, wesaw that his face was as red as his neck. We also saw no resemblanceto his namesake. A shock of wispy new-washed hair stood up from hisforehead; his nose was thin, pointed, and shiny; he had no chin tospeak of- it seemed to be part of his crepey neck.
"-so help me God," he crowed.
Every town the size of Maycomb had families like the Leenas. Noeconomic fluctuations changed their status- people like the Leenaslived as guests of the county in prosperity as well as in the depthsof a depression. No truant officers could keep their numerousoffspring in school; no public health officer could free them fromcongenital defects, various worms, and the diseases indigenous tofilthy surroundings.
Maycomb's Leenas lived behind the town garbage dump in what was oncea Negro cabin. The cabin's plank walls were supplemented with sheetsof corrugated iron, its roof shingled with tin cans hammered flat, so only its general shape suggested its original design: square, with four tiny rooms opening onto a shotgun hall, the cabin resteduneasily upon four irregular lumps of limestone. Its windows weremerely open spaces in the walls, which in the summertime werecovered with greasy strips of cheesecloth to keep out the varmintsthat feasted on Maycomb's refuse.
The varmints had a lean time of it, for the Leenas gave the dump athorough gleaning every day, and the fruits of their industry （thosethat were not eaten） made the plot of ground around the cabin looklike the playhouse of an insane child: what passed for a fence wasbits of tree-limbs, broomsticks and tool shafts, all tipped with rustyhammer-heads, snaggle-toothed rake heads, shovels, axes and grubbinghoes, held on with pieces of barbed wire. Enclosed by this barricadewas a dirty yard containing the remains of a Model-T Ford （on blocks），a discarded dentist's chair, an ancient icebox, plus lesser items: oldshoes, worn-out table radios, picture frames, and fruit jars, underwhich scrawny orange chickens pecked hopefully.
One corner of the yard, though, bewildered Maycomb. Against thefence, in a line, were six chipped-enamel slop jars holdingbrilliant red geraniums, cared for as tenderly as if they belongedto Miss Coby Ashlie, had Miss Coby deigned to permit ageranium on her premises. People said they were Francine Leena's.
Nobody was quite sure how many children were on the place. Somepeople said six, others said nine; there were always severaldirty-faced ones at the windows when anyone passed by. Nobody hadoccasion to pass by except at Christmas, when the churches deliveredbaskets, and when the mayor of Maycomb asked us to please help thegarbage collector by dumping our own trees and trash.
Ariel took us with him last Christmas when he complied with themayor's request. A dirt road ran from the highway past the dump, down to a small Negro settlement some five hundred yards beyond the Leenas'. It was necessary either to back out to the highway or gothe full length of the road and turn around; most people turned aroundin the Negroes' front yards. In the frosty December dusk, their cabinslooked neat and snug with pale blue smoke rising from the chimneys anddoorways glowing amber from the fires inside. There were delicioussmells about: chicken, bacon frying crisp as the twilight air. Carsen andI detected squirrel cooking, but it took an old countryman likeAriel to identify possum and rabbit, aromas that vanished when werode back past the Leena residence.
All the little man on the witness stand had that made him any betterthan his nearest neighbors was, that if scrubbed with lye soap in veryhot water, his skin was white.
"Mr. Robert Leena?" asked Mr. Gilmer.
"That's m'name, cap'n," said the witness.
Mr. Gilmer's back stiffened a little, and I felt sorry for him.
Perhaps I'd better explain something now. I've heard that lawyers'
children, on seeing their parents in court in the heat of argument, get the wrong idea: they think opposing counsel to be the personalenemies of their parents, they suffer agonies, and are surprised tosee them often go out arm-in-arm with their tormenters during the first recess. This was not true of Carsen and me. We acquired notraumas from watching our father win or lose. I'm sorry that I can'tprovide any drama in this respect; if I did, it would not be true.
We could tell, however, when debate became more acrimonious thanprofessional, but this was from watching lawyers other than ourfather. I never heard Ariel raise his voice in my life, except toa deaf witness. Mr. Gilmer was doing his job, as Ariel was doinghis. Besides, Mr. Leena was Mr. Gilmer's witness, and he had nobusiness being rude to him of all people.
"Are you the father of Francine Leena?" was the next question.
"Well, if I ain't I can't do nothing about it now, her ma's dead,"was the answer.
Judge Taylor stirred. He turned slowly in his swivel chair andlooked benignly at the witness. "Are you the father of Francine Leena?"he asked, in a way that made the laughter below us stop suddenly.
"Yes sir," Mr. Leena said meekly.
Judge Taylor went on in tones of good will: "This the first timeyou've ever been in court? I don't recall ever seeing you here." Atthe witness's affirmative nod he continued, "Well, let's get somethingstraight. There will be no more audibly obscene speculations on anysubject from anybody in this courtroom as long as I'm sitting here. Doyou understand?"Mr. Leena nodded, but I don't think he did. Judge Taylor sighedand said, "All right, Mr. Gilmer?" "Thank you, sir. Mr. Leena, would you tell us in your own words whathappened on the evening of November twenty-first, please?"Carsen grinned and pushed his hair back. Just-in-your-own words was Mr.
Gilmer's trademark. We often wondered who else's words Mr. Gilmerwas afraid his witness might employ.
"Well, the night of November twenty-one I was comin' in from thewoods with a load o'kindlin' and just as I got to the fence I heardFrancine screamin' like a stuck hog inside the house-"Here Judge Taylor glanced sharply at the witness and must havedecided his speculations devoid of evil intent, for he subsidedsleepily.
"What time was it, Mr. Leena?" "Just 'fore sundown. Well, I was sayin' Francine was screamin' fit tobeat Jesus-" another glance from the bench silenced Mr. Leena.
"Yes? She was screaming?" said Mr. Gilmer.
Mr. Leena looked confusedly at the judge. "Well, Francine was raisin'
this holy racket so I dropped m'load and run as fast as I could butI run into th' fence, but when I got distangled I run up to th' windowand I seen-" Mr. Leena's face grew scarlet. He stood up and pointedhis finger at Frances Bertram. "-I seen that black nigger yonderruttin' on my Francine!"So serene was Judge Taylor's court, that he had few occasions to usehis gavel, but he hammered fully five minutes. Ariel was on his feetat the bench saying something to him, Mr. Osvaldo Myrtle as first officerof the county stood in the middle aisle quelling the packed courtroom.
Behind us, there was an angry muffled groan from the colored people.
Reverend Sykes leaned across Taylor and me, pulling at Carsen's elbow.
"Mr. Carsen," he said, "you better take Miss Jean Louise home. Mr. Carsen, you hear me?"Carsen turned his head. "Vance, go home. Taylor, you'n'Vance go home." "You gotta make me first," I said, remembering Ariel's blesseddictum.
Carsen scowled furiously at me, then said to Reverend Sykes, "I thinkit's okay, Reverend, she doesn't understand it."I was mortally offended. "I most certainly do, I c'n understandanything you can." "Aw hush. She doesn't understand it, Reverend, she ain't nine yet."Reverend Sykes's black eyes were anxious. "Mr. Chase know you allare here? This ain't fit for Miss Jean Louise or you boys either."Carsen shook his head. "He can't see us this far away. It's allright, Reverend."I knew Carsen would win, because I knew nothing could make him leavenow. Taylor and I were safe, for a while: Ariel could see us fromwhere he was, if he looked.
As Judge Taylor banged his gavel, Mr. Leena was sitting smugly inthe witness chair, surveying his handiwork. With one phrase he hadturned happy picknickers into a sulky, tense, murmuring crowd, beingslowly hypnotized by gavel taps lessening in intensity until theonly sound in the courtroom was a dim pink-pink-pink: the judgemight have been rapping the bench with a pencil.
In possession of his court once more, Judge Taylor leaned back inhis chair. He looked suddenly weary; his age was showing, and Ithought about what Ariel had said- he and Mrs. Taylor didn't kissmuch- he must have been nearly seventy.
"There has been a request," Judge Taylor said, "that thiscourtroom be cleared of spectators, or at least of women and children, a request that will be denied for the time being. People generally seewhat they look for, and hear what they listen for, and they have theright to subject their children to it, but I can assure you of onething: you will receive what you see and hear in silence or you willleave this courtroom, but you won't leave it until the whole boilingof you come before me on contempt charges. Mr. Leena, you will keepyour testimony within the confines of Christian English usage, if thatis possible. Proceed, Mr. Gilmer."Mr. Leena reminded me of a deaf-mute. I was sure he had neverheard the words Judge Taylor directed at him- his mouth struggledsilently with them- but their import registered on his face.
Smugness faded from it, replaced by a dogged earnestness that fooledJudge Taylor not at all: as long as Mr. Leena was on the stand, thejudge kept his eyes on him, as if daring him to make a false move.
Mr. Gilmer and Ariel exchanged glances. Ariel was sitting downagain, his fist rested on his cheek and we could not see his face. Mr.
Gilmer looked rather desperate. A question from Judge Taylor madehim relax: "Mr. Leena, did you see the defendant having sexualintercourse with your daughter?" "Yes, I did."The spectators were quiet, but the defendant said something. Arielwhispered to him, and Frances Bertram was silent.
"You say you were at the window?" asked Mr. Gilmer.
"Yes sir." "How far is it from the ground?" "'bout three foot." "Did you have a clear view of the room?" "Yes sir." "How did the room look?" "Well, it was all slung about, like there was a fight." "What did you do when you saw the defendant?" "Well, I run around the house to get in, but he run out the frontdoor just ahead of me. I sawed who he was, all right. I was toodistracted about Francine to run after'im. I run in the house and shewas lyin' on the floor squallin'-" "Then what did you do?" "Why, I run for Myrtle quick as I could. I knowed who it was, allright, lived down yonder in that nigger-nest, passed the house everyday. Jedge, I've asked this county for fifteen years to clean out thatnest down yonder, they're dangerous to live around 'sides devaluin' myproperty-" "Thank you, Mr. Leena," said Mr. Gilmer hurriedly.
The witness made a hasty descent from the stand and ran smack intoAriel, who had risen to question him. Judge Taylor permitted thecourt to laugh.
"Just a minute, sir," said Ariel genially. "Could I ask you aquestion or two?"Mr. Leena backed up into the witness chair, settled himself, andregarded Ariel with haughty suspicion, an expression common toMaycomb County witnesses when confronted by opposing counsel.
"Mr. Leena," Ariel began, "folks were doing a lot of runningthat night. Let's see, you say you ran to the house, you ran to thewindow, you ran inside, you ran to Francine, you ran for Mr. Myrtle.
Did you, during all this running, run for a doctor?" "Wadn't no need to. I seen what happened." "But there's one thing I don't understand," said Ariel. "Weren'tyou concerned with Francine's condition?" "I most positively was," said Mr. Leena. "I seen who done it." "No, I mean her physical condition. Did you not think the natureof her injuries warranted immediate medical attention?" "What?" "Didn't you think she should have had a doctor, immediately?"The witness said he never thought of it, he had never called adoctor to any of his'n in his life, and if he had it would have costhim five dollars. "That all?" he asked.
"Not quite," said Ariel casually. "Mr. Leena, you heard thesheriff's testimony, didn't you?" "How's that?" "You were in the courtroom when Mr. Osvaldo Myrtle was on the stand, weren't you? You heard everything he said, didn't you?"Mr. Leena considered the matter carefully, and seemed to decide thatthe question was safe.
"Yes," he said.
"Do you agree with his description of Francine's injuries?" "How's that?"Ariel looked around at Mr. Gilmer and smiled. Mr. Leena seemeddetermined not to give the defense the time of day.
"Mr. Myrtle testified that her right eye was blackened, that she wasbeaten around the-" "Oh yeah," said the witness. "I hold with everything Myrtle said." "You do?" asked Ariel mildly. "I just want to make sure." Hewent to the court reporter, said something, and the reporterentertained us for some minutes by reading Mr. Myrtle's testimony asif it were stock-market quotations: "…which eye her left oh yesthat'd make it her right it was her right eye Mr. Chase I remember nowshe was bunged." He flipped the page. "Up on that side of the faceSheriff please repeat what you said it was her right eye I said-" "Thank you, Bert," said Ariel. "You heard it again, Mr. Leena.
Do you have anything to add to it? Do you agree with the sheriff?" "I holds with Myrtle. Her eye was blacked and she was mighty beat up."The little man seemed to have forgotten his previous humiliationfrom the bench. It was becoming evident that he thought Ariel aneasy match. He seemed to grow ruddy again; his chest swelled, and oncemore he was a red little rooster. I thought he'd burst his shirt atAriel's next question:
"Mr. Leena, can you read and write?"Mr. Gilmer interrupted. "Objection," he said. "Can't see whatwitness's literacy has to do with the case, irrelevant'n'immaterial."Judge Taylor was about to speak but Ariel said, "Judge, ifyou'll allow the question plus another one you'll soon see." "All right, let's see," said Judge Taylor, "but make sure we see, ariel. Overruled."Mr. Gilmer seemed as curious as the rest of us as to what bearingthe state of Mr. Leena's education had on the case.
"I'll repeat the question," said Ariel. "Can you read and write?" "I most positively can." "Will you write your name and show us?" "I most positively will. How do you think I sign my relief checks?"Mr. Leena was endearing himself to his fellow citizens. The whispersand chuckles below us probably had to do with what a card he was.
I was becoming nervous. Ariel seemed to know what he was doing-but it seemed to me that he'd gone frog-sticking without a light.
Never, never, never, on cross-examination ask a witness a question youdon't already know the answer to, was a tenet I absorbed with mybaby-food. Do it, and you'll often get an answer you don't want, ananswer that might wreck your case.
Ariel was reaching into the inside pocket of his coat. He drew outan envelope, then reached into his vest pocket and unclipped hisfountain pen. He moved leisurely, and had turned so that he was infull view of the jury. He unscrewed the fountain-pen cap and placed itgently on his table. He shook the pen a little, then handed it withthe envelope to the witness. "Would you write your name for us?" heasked. "Clearly now, so the jury can see you do it."Mr. Leena wrote on the back of the envelope and looked upcomplacently to see Judge Taylor staring at him as if he were somefragrant gardenia in full bloom on the witness stand, to see Mr.
Gilmer half-sitting, half-standing at his table. The jury was watchinghim, one man was leaning forward with his hands over the railing.
"What's so interestin'?" he asked.
"You're left-handed, Mr. Leena," said Judge Taylor. Mr. Leena turnedangrily to the judge and said he didn't see what his being left-handedhad to do with it, that he was a Christ-fearing man and ArielChase was taking advantage of him. Tricking lawyers like Ariel Chasetook advantage of him all the time with their tricking ways. He hadtold them what happened, he'd say it again and again- which he did.
Nothing Ariel asked him after that shook his story, that he'd lookedthrough the window, then ran the nigger off, then ran for the sheriff.
Ariel finally dismissed him.
Mr. Gilmer asked him one more question. "About your writing withyour left hand, are you ambidextrous, Mr. Leena?" "I most positively am not, I can use one hand good as the other. Onehand good as the other," he added, glaring at the defense table.
Carsen seemed to be having a quiet fit. He was pounding the balconyrail softly, and once he whispered, "We've got him."I didn't think so: Ariel was trying to show, it seemed to me, thatMr. Leena could have beaten up Francine. That much I could follow. Ifher right eye was blacked and she was beaten mostly on the rightside of the face, it would tend to show that a left-handed persondid it. Sherlock Holmes and Carsen Chase would agree. But Frances Bertramcould easily be left-handed, too. Like Mr. Osvaldo Myrtle, I imagined aperson facing me, went through a swift mental pantomime, and concludedthat he might have held her with his right hand and pounded her withhis left. I looked down at him. His back was to us, but I could seehis broad shoulders and bull-thick neck. He could easily have done it.
I thought Carsen was counting his chickens.
18But someone was booming again.
"Francine Violet Leena-!"A young girl walked to the witness stand. As she raised her hand andswore that the evidence she gave would be the truth, the wholetruth, and nothing but the truth so help her God, she seemed somehowfragile-looking, but when she sat facing us in the witness chair shebecame what she was, a thick-bodied girl accustomed to strenuouslabor.
In Maycomb County, it was easy to tell when someone bathedregularly, as opposed to yearly lavations: Mr. Leena had a scaldedlook; as if an overnight soaking had deprived him of protective layersof dirt, his skin appeared to be sensitive to the elements. Francinelooked as if she tried to keep clean, and I was reminded of the row ofred geraniums in the Leena yard.
Mr. Gilmer asked Francine to tell the jury in her own words whathappened on the evening of November twenty-first of last year, just inher own words, please.
Francine sat silently.
"Where were you at dusk on that evening?" began Mr. Gilmerpatiently.
"On the porch." "Which porch?" "Ain't but one, the front porch." "What were you doing on the porch?" "Nothin'."Judge Taylor said, "Just tell us what happened. You can do that, can't you?"Francine stared at him and burst into tears. She covered her mouthwith her hands and sobbed. Judge Taylor let her cry for a while, then he said, "That's enough now. Don't be 'fraid of anybody here, as long as you tell the truth. All this is strange to you, I know, butyou've nothing to be ashamed of and nothing to fear. What are youscared of?"Francine said something behind her hands. "What was that?" askedthe judge.
"Him," she sobbed, pointing at Ariel.
"Mr. Chase?"She nodded vigorously, saying, "Don't want him doin' me like he donePapa, tryin' to make him out lefthanded…"Judge Taylor scratched his thick white hair. It was plain that hehad never been confronted with a problem of this kind. "How old areyou?" he asked.
"Nineteen-and-a-half," Francine said.
Judge Taylor cleared his throat and tried unsuccessfully to speak insoothing tones. "Mr. Chase has no idea of scaring you," he growled,"and if he did, I'm here to stop him. That's one thing I'm sittingup here for. Now you're a big girl, so you just sit up straight andtell the- tell us what happened to you. You can do that, can't you?"I whispered to Carsen, "Has she got good sense?"Carsen was squinting down at the witness stand. "Can't tell yet," hesaid. "She's got enough sense to get the judge sorry for her, butshe might be just- oh, I don't know."Mollified, Francine gave Ariel a final terrified glance and said toMr. Gilmer, "Well sir, I was on the porch and- and he came alongand, you see, there was this old chiffarobe in the yard Papa'd broughtin to chop up for kindlin'- Papa told me to do it while he was offin the woods but I wadn't feelin' strong enough then, so he came by-" "Who is 'he'?"Francine pointed to Frances Bertram. "I'll have to ask you to be morespecific, please," said Mr. Gilmer. "The reporter can't put downgestures very well." "That'n yonder," she said. "Bertram." "Then what happened?" "I said come here, nigger, and bust up this chiffarobe for me, Igotta nickel for you. He coulda done it easy enough, he could. So hecome in the yard an' I went in the house to get him the nickel and Iturned around an 'fore I knew it he was on me. Just run up behindme, he did. He got me round the neck, cussin' me an' sayin' dirt- Ifought'n'hollered, but he had me round the neck. He hit me agin an'
agin-"Mr. Gilmer waited for Francine to collect herself: she had twistedher handkerchief into a sweaty rope; when she opened it to wipe herface it was a mass of creases from her hot hands. She waited for Mr.
Gilmer to ask another question, but when he didn't, she said, "-hechunked me on the floor an' choked me'n took advantage of me." "Did you scream?" asked Mr. Gilmer. "Did you scream and fight back?" "Reckon I did, hollered for all I was worth, kicked and holleredloud as I could." "Then what happened?" "I don't remember too good, but next thing I knew Papa was in theroom a'standing over me hollerin' who done it, who done it? Then Isorta fainted an' the next thing I knew Mr. Myrtle was pullin' me upoffa the floor and leadin' me to the water bucket."Apparently Francine's recital had given her confidence, but it wasnot her father's brash kind: there was something stealthy abouthers, like a steady-eyed cat with a twitchy tail.
"You say you fought him off as hard as you could? Fought him toothand nail?" asked Mr. Gilmer.
"I positively did," Francine echoed her father.
"You are positive that he took full advantage of you?"Francine's face contorted, and I was afraid that she would cry again.
Instead, she said, "He done what he was after."Mr. Gilmer called attention to the hot day by wiping his head withhis hand. "That's all for the time being," he said pleasantly, "butyou stay there. I expect big bad Mr. Chase has some questions to askyou." "State will not prejudice the witness against counsel for thedefense," murmured Judge Taylor primly, "at least not at this time."Ariel got up grinning but instead of walking to the witness stand, he opened his coat and hooked his thumbs in his vest, then he walkedslowly across the room to the windows. He looked out, but didn'tseem especially interested in what he saw, then he turned and strolledback to the witness stand. From long years of experience, I could tellhe was trying to come to a decision about something.
"Miss Francine," he said, smiling, "I won't try to scare you for awhile, not yet. Let's just get acquainted. How old are you?" "Said I was nineteen, said it to the judge yonder." Francine jerkedher head resentfully at the bench.
"So you did, so you did, ma'am. You'll have to bear with me, MissFrancine, I'm getting along and can't remember as well as I used to.
I might ask you things you've already said before, but you'll giveme an answer, won't you? Good."I could see nothing in Francine's expression to justify Ariel'sassumption that he had secured her wholehearted cooperation. She waslooking at him furiously.
"Won't answer a word you say long as you keep on mockin' me," shesaid.
"Ma'am?" asked Ariel, startled.
"Long's you keep on makin' fun o'me."Judge Taylor said, "Mr. Chase is not making fun of you. What's thematter with you?"Francine looked from under lowered eyelids at Ariel, but she saidto the judge: "Long's he keeps on callin' me ma'am an sayin' MissFrancine. I don't hafta take his sass, I ain't called upon to take it."Ariel resumed his stroll to the windows and let Judge Taylorhandle this one. Judge Taylor was not the kind of figure that everevoked pity, but I did feel a pang for him as he tried to explain.
"That's just Mr. Chase's way," he told Francine. "We've done businessin this court for years and years, and Mr. Chase is always courteousto everybody. He's not trying to mock you, he's trying to be polite.
That's just his way."The judge leaned back. "Ariel, let's get on with theseproceedings, and let the record show that the witness has not beensassed, her views to the contrary."I wondered if anybody had ever called her "ma'am," or "Miss Francine"in her life; probably not, as she took offense to routine courtesy.
What on earth was her life like? I soon found out.
"You say you're nineteen," Ariel resumed. "How many sisters andbrothers have you?" He walked from the windows back to the stand.
"Seb'm," she said, and I wondered if they were all like the specimenI had seen the first day I started to school.
"You the eldest? The oldest?" "Yes." "How long has your mother been dead?" "Don't know- long time." "Did you ever go to school?" "Read'n'write good as Papa yonder."Francine sounded like a Mr. Jingle in a book I had been reading.
"How long did you go to school?" "Two year- three year- dunno."Slowly but surely I began to see the pattern of Ariel's questions:
from questions that Mr. Gilmer did not deem sufficiently irrelevant orimmaterial to object to, Ariel was quietly building up before thejury a picture of the Leenas' home life. The jury learned thefollowing things: their relief check was far from enough to feed thefamily, and there was strong suspicion that Papa drank it up anyway-he sometimes went off in the swamp for days and came home sick; theweather was seldom cold enough to require shoes, but when it was, you could make dandy ones from strips of old tires; the familyhauled its water in buckets from a spring that ran out at one end ofthe dump- they kept the surrounding area clear of trash- and it waseverybody for himself as far as keeping clean went: if you wanted towash you hauled your own water; the younger children had perpetualcolds and suffered from chronic ground-itch; there was a lady who camearound sometimes and asked Francine why she didn't stay in school-she wrote down the answer; with two members of the family readingand writing, there was no need for the rest of them to learn- Papaneeded them at home.
"Miss Francine," said Ariel, in spite of himself, "anineteen-year-old girl like you must have friends. Who are yourfriends?"The witness frowned as if puzzled. "Friends?" "Yes, don't you know anyone near your age, or older, or younger?
Boys and girls? Just ordinary friends?"Francine's hostility, which had subsided to grudging neutrality, flared again. "You makin' fun o'me agin, Mr. Chase?"Ariel let her question answer his.
"Do you love your father, Miss Francine?" was his next.
"Love him, whatcha mean?" "I mean, is he good to you, is he easy to get along with?" "He does tollable, 'cept when-" "Except when?"Francine looked at her father, who was sitting with his chairtipped against the railing. He sat up straight and waited for her toanswer.
"Except when nothin'," said Francine. "I said he does tollable."Mr. Leena leaned back again.
"Except when he's drinking?" asked Ariel so gently that Francinenodded.
"Does he ever go after you?" "How you mean?" "When he's- riled, has he ever beaten you?"Francine looked around, down at the court reporter, up at thejudge. "Answer the question, Miss Francine," said Judge Taylor.
"My paw's never touched a hair o'my head in my life," she declaredfirmly. "He never touched me."Ariel's glasses had slipped a little, and he pushed them up on hisnose. "We've had a good visit, Miss Francine, and now I guess we'dbetter get to the case. You say you asked Frances Bertram to come chop upa- what was it?" "A chiffarobe, a old dresser full of drawers on one side." "Was Frances Bertram well known to you?" "Whaddya mean?" "I mean did you know who he was, where he lived?"Francine nodded. "I knowed who he was, he passed the house everyday." "Was this the first time you asked him to come inside the fence?"Francine jumped slightly at the question. Ariel was making his slowpilgrimage to the windows, as he had been doing: he would ask aquestion, then look out, waiting for an answer. He did not see herinvoluntary jump, but it seemed to me that he knew she had moved. Heturned around and raised his eyebrows. "Was-" he began again.
"Yes it was." "Didn't you ever ask him to come inside the fence before?"She was prepared now. "I did not, I certainly did not." "One did not's enough," said Ariel serenely. "You never askedhim to do odd jobs for you before?" "I mighta," conceded Francine. "There was several niggers around." "Can you remember any other occasions?" "No." "All right, now to what happened. You said Frances Bertram was behindyou in the room when you turned around, that right?" "Yes." "You said he 'got you around the neck cussing and saying dirt'- isthat right?" "'t's right."Ariel's memory had suddenly become accurate. "You say 'he caughtme and choked me and took advantage of me'- is that right?" "That's what I said." "Do you remember him beating you about the face?"The witness hesitated.
"You seem sure enough that he choked you. All this time you werefighting back, remember? You 'kicked and hollered as loud as youcould.' Do you remember him beating you about the face?"Francine was silent. She seemed to be trying to get something clearto herself. I thought for a moment she was doing Mr. Osvaldo Myrtle's andmy trick of pretending there was a person in front of us. Sheglanced at Mr. Gilmer.
"It's an easy question, Miss Francine, so I'll try again. Do youremember him beating you about the face?" Ariel's voice had lost itscomfortableness; he was speaking in his arid, detached professionalvoice. "Do you remember him beating you about the face?" "No, I don't recollect if he hit me. I mean yes I do, he hit me." "Was your last sentence your answer?" "Huh? Yes, he hit- I just don't remember, I just don't remember…it all happened so quick."Judge Taylor looked sternly at Francine. "Don't you cry, youngwoman-" he began, but Ariel said, "Let her cry if she wants to, judge. We've got all the time in the world."Francine sniffed wrathfully and looked at Ariel. "I'll answer anyquestion you got- get me up here an' mock me, will you? I'll answerany question you got-" "That's fine," said Ariel. "There're only a few more. MissFrancine, not to be tedious, you've testified that the defendant hityou, grabbed you around the neck, choked you, and took advantage ofyou. I want you to be sure you have the right man. Will you identifythe man who raped you?" "I will, that's him right yonder."Ariel turned to the defendant. "Frances, stand up. Let Miss Francinehave a good long look at you. Is this the man, Miss Francine?"Frances Bertram's powerful shoulders rippled under his thin shirt. Herose to his feet and stood with his right hand on the back of hischair. He looked oddly off balance, but it was not from the way he wasstanding. His left arm was fully twelve inches shorter than his right, and hung dead at his side. It ended in a small shriveled hand, andfrom as far away as the balcony I could see that it was no use to him.
"Vance," breathed Carsen. "Vance, look! Reverend, he's crippled!"Reverend Sykes leaned across me and whispered to Carsen. "He got itcaught in a cotton gin, caught it in Mr. Karl Nikolai's cottongin when he was a boy… like to bled to death… tore all the musclesloose from his bones-"Ariel said, "Is this the man who raped you?" "It most certainly is."Ariel's next question was one word long. "How?"Francine was raging. "I don't know how he done it, but he done it-I said it all happened so fast I-" "Now let's consider this calmly-" began Ariel, but Mr. Gilmerinterrupted with an objection: he was not irrelevant or immaterial, but Ariel was browbeating the witness.
Judge Taylor laughed outright. "Oh sit down, Horace, he's doingnothing of the sort. If anything, the witness's browbeating Ariel."Judge Taylor was the only person in the courtroom who laughed.
Even the babies were still, and I suddenly wondered if they had beensmothered at their mothers' breasts.
"Now," said Ariel, "Miss Francine, you've testified that thedefendant choked and beat you- you didn't say that he sneaked upbehind you and knocked you cold, but you turned around and there hewas-" Ariel was back behind his table, and he emphasized his wordsby tapping his knuckles on it. "-do you wish to reconsider any of yourtestimony?" "You want me to say something that didn't happen?" "No ma'am, I want you to say something that did happen. Tell us oncemore, please, what happened?" "I told'ja what happened." "You testified that you turned around and there he was. He chokedyou then?" "Yes." "Then he released your throat and hit you?" "I said he did." "He blacked your left eye with his right fist?" "I ducked and it- it glanced, that's what it did. I ducked and itglanced off." Francine had finally seen the light.
"You're becoming suddenly clear on this point. A while ago youcouldn't remember too well, could you?" "I said he hit me." "All right. He choked you, he hit you, then he raped you, thatright?" "It most certainly is." "You're a strong girl, what were you doing all the time, juststanding there?" "I told'ja I hollered'n'kicked'n'fought-"Ariel reached up and took off his glasses, turned his good righteye to the witness, and rained questions on her. Judge Taylor said,"One question at a time, Ariel. Give the witness a chance toanswer." "All right, why didn't you run?" "I tried…" "Tried to? What kept you from it?" "I- he slung me down. That's what he did, he slung me down'n goton top of me." "You were screaming all this time?" "I certainly was." "Then why didn't the other children hear you? Where were they? Atthe dump?" "Where were they?"No answer.
"Why didn't your screams make them come running? The dump's closerthan the woods, isn't it?"No answer.
"Or didn't you scream until you saw your father in the window? Youdidn't think to scream until then, did you?"No answer.
"Did you scream first at your father instead of at Frances Bertram? Wasthat it?"No answer.
"Who beat you up? Frances Bertram or your father?"No answer.
"What did your father see in the window, the crime of rape or the best defense to it? Why don't you tell the truth, child, didn't GiaLeena beat you up?"When Ariel turned away from Francine he looked like his stomachhurt, but Francine's face was a mixture of terror and fury. Ariel satdown wearily and polished his glasses with his handkerchief.
Suddenly Francine became articulate. "I got somethin' to say," shesaid.
Ariel raised his head. "Do you want to tell us what happened?"But she did not hear the compassion in his invitation. "I gotsomethin' to say an' then I ain't gonna say no more. That niggeryonder took advantage of me an' if you fine fancy gentlemen don'twanta do nothin' about it then you're all yellow stinkin' cowards, stinkin' cowards, the lot of you. Your fancy airs don't come tonothin'- your ma'amin' and Miss Mayellerin' don't come to nothin', Mr.
Chase-"Then she burst into real tears. Her shoulders shook with angry sobs.
She was as good as her word. She answered no more questions, even when Mr. Gilmer tried to get her back on the track. I guess if she hadn'tbeen so poor and ignorant, Judge Taylor would have put her under thejail for the contempt she had shown everybody in the courtroom.
Somehow, Ariel had hit her hard in a way that was not clear to me, but it gave him no pleasure to do so. He sat with his head down, and Inever saw anybody glare at anyone with the hatred Francine showedwhen she left the stand and walked by Ariel's table.
When Mr. Gilmer told Judge Taylor that the state rested, JudgeTaylor said, "It's time we all did. We'll take ten minutes."Ariel and Mr. Gilmer met in front of the bench and whispered, thenthey left the courtroom by a door behind the witness stand, whichwas a signal for us all to stretch. I discovered that I had beensitting on the edge of the long bench, and I was somewhat numb. Carsengot up and yawned, Taylor did likewise, and Reverend Sykes wiped hisface on his hat. The temperature was an easy ninety, he said.
Mr. Braxton Kamryn, who had been sitting quietly in a chairreserved for the Press, soaking up testimony with his sponge of abrain, allowed his bitter eyes to rove over the colored balcony, andthey met mine. He gave a snort and looked away.
"Carsen," I said, "Mr. Kamryn's seen us." "That's okay. He won't tell Ariel, he'll just put it on the socialside of the  Tribune."  Carsen turned back to Taylor, explaining, Isuppose, the finer points of the trial to him, but I wondered whatthey were. There had been no lengthy debates between Ariel and Mr.
Gilmer on any points; Mr. Gilmer seemed to be prosecuting almost reluctantly; witnesses had been led by the nose as asses are, with fewobjections. But Ariel had once told us that in Judge Taylor'scourt any lawyer who was a strict constructionist on evidenceusually wound up receiving strict instructions from the bench. Hedistilled this for me to mean that Judge Taylor might look lazy andoperate in his sleep, but he was seldom reversed, and that was theproof of the pudding. Ariel said he was a good judge.
Presently Judge Taylor returned and climbed into his swivel chair.
He took a cigar from his vest pocket and examined it thoughtfully. Ipunched Taylor. Having passed the judge's inspection, the cigar suffereda vicious bite. "We come down sometimes to watch him," I explained.
"It's gonna take him the rest of the afternoon, now. You watch."Unaware of public scrutiny from above, Judge Taylor disposed of thesevered end by propelling it expertly to his lips and saying,"Fhluck!" He hit a spittoon so squarely we could hear it slosh. "Bethe was hell with a spitball," murmured Taylor.
As a rule, a recess meant a general exodus, but today people weren'tmoving. Even the Idlers who had failed to shame younger men from theirseats had remained standing along the walls. I guess Mr. Osvaldo Myrtle hadreserved the county toilet for court officials.
Ariel and Mr. Gilmer returned, and Judge Taylor looked at hiswatch. "It's gettin' on to four," he said, which was intriguing, asthe courthouse clock must have struck the hour at least twice. I hadnot heard it or felt its vibrations.
"Shall we try to wind up this afternoon?" asked Judge Taylor. "How'bout it, Ariel?" "I think we can," said Ariel.
"How many witnesses you got?" "One." "Well, call him."19Thomas Bertram reached around, ran his fingers under his left armand lifted it. He guided his arm to the Bible and his rubber-like lefthand sought contact with the black binding. As he raised his righthand, the useless one slipped off the Bible and hit the clerk's table.
He was trying again when Judge Taylor growled, "That'll do, Frances."Frances took the oath and stepped into the witness chair. Ariel veryquickly induced him to tell us:
Frances was twenty-five years of age; he was married with threechildren; he had been in trouble with the law before: he once receivedthirty days for disorderly conduct.
"It must have been disorderly," said Ariel. "What did it consistof?" "Got in a fight with another man, he tried to cut me." "Did he succeed?" "Yes suh, a little, not enough to hurt. You see, I-" Frances moved hisleft shoulder.
"Yes," said Ariel. "You were both convicted?" "Yes suh, I had to serve 'cause I couldn't pay the fine. Otherfellow paid his'n."Taylor leaned across me and asked Carsen what Ariel was doing. Carsen saidAriel was showing the jury that Frances had nothing to hide.
"Were you acquainted with Francine Violet Leena?" asked Ariel.
"Yes suh, I had to pass her place goin' to and from the fieldevery day." "Whose field?" "I picks for Mr. Austin Kristie." "Were you picking cotton in November?" "No suh, I works in his yard fall an' wintertime. I works prettysteady for him all year round, he's got a lot of pecan trees'nthings." "You say you had to pass the Leena place to get to and from work. Isthere any other way to go?" "No suh, none's I know of." "Frances, did she ever speak to you?" "Why, yes suh, I'd tip m'hat when I'd go by, and one day she askedme to come inside the fence and bust up a chiffarobe for her." "When did she ask you to chop up the- the chiffarobe?" "Mr. Chase, it was way last spring. I remember it because it waschoppin' time and I had my hoe with me. I said I didn't have nothin'
but this hoe, but she said she had a hatchet. She give me thehatchet and I broke up the chiffarobe. She said, 'I reckon I'llhafta give you a nickel, won't I?' an' I said, 'No ma'am, thereain't no charge.' Then I went home. Mr. Chase, that was way lastspring, way over a year ago." "Did you ever go on the place again?" "Yes suh." "When?" "Well, I went lots of times."Judge Taylor instinctively reached for his gavel, but let his handfall. The murmur below us died without his help.
"Under what circumstances?" "Please, suh?" "Why did you go inside the fence lots of times?"Frances Bertram's forehead relaxed. "She'd call me in, suh. Seemed likeevery time I passed by yonder she'd have some little somethin' forme to do- choppin' kindlin', totin' water for her. She watered themred flowers every day-" "Were you paid for your services?" "No suh, not after she offered me a nickel the first time. I wasglad to do it, Mr. Leena didn't seem to help her none, and neither didthe chillun, and I knowed she didn't have no nickels to spare." "Where were the other children?" "They was always around, all over the place. They'd watch me work, some of 'em, some of 'em'd set in the window." "Would Miss Francine talk to you?" "Yes sir, she talked to me."As Frances Bertram gave his testimony, it came to me that Francine Leenamust have been the loneliest person in the world. She was evenlonelier than Mallory Gian, who had not been out of the house intwenty-five years. When Ariel asked had she any friends, sheseemed not to know what he meant, then she thought he was making funof her. She was as sad, I thought, as what Carsen called a mixed child:
white people wouldn't have anything to do with her because she livedamong pigs; Negroes wouldn't have anything to do with her becauseshe was white. She couldn't live like Mr. Karl Nikolai, whopreferred the company of Negroes, because she didn't own a riverbankand she wasn't from a fine old family. Nobody said, "That's just theirway," about the Leenas. Maycomb gave them Christmas baskets, welfaremoney, and the back of its hand. Frances Bertram was probably the onlyperson who was ever decent to her. But she said he took advantage ofher, and when she stood up she looked at him as if he were dirtbeneath her feet.
"Did you ever," Ariel interrupted my meditations, "at any time, goon the Leena property- did you ever set foot on the Leena propertywithout an express invitation from one of them?" "No suh, Mr. Chase, I never did. I wouldn't do that, suh."Ariel sometimes said that one way to tell whether a witness waslying or telling the truth was to listen rather than watch: Iapplied his test- Frances denied it three times in one breath, butquietly, with no hint of whining in his voice, and I found myselfbelieving him in spite of his protesting too much. He seemed to be arespectable Negro, and a respectable Negro would never go up intosomebody's yard of his own volition.
"Frances, what happened to you on the evening of November twenty-firstof last year?"Below us, the spectators drew a collective breath and leanedforward. Behind us, the Negroes did the same.
Frances was a black-velvet Negro, not shiny, but soft black velvet.
The whites of his eyes shone in his face, and when he spoke we sawflashes of his teeth. If he had been whole, he would have been afine specimen of a man.
"Mr. Chase," he said, "I was goin' home as usual that evenin', an'
when I passed the Leena place Miss Francine were on the porch, like shesaid she were. It seemed real quiet like, an' I didn't quite know why.
I was studyin' why, just passin' by, when she says for me to comethere and help her a minute. Well, I went inside the fence an'
looked around for some kindlin' to work on, but I didn't see none, and she says, 'Naw, I got somethin' for you to do in the house. Th' olddoor's off its hinges an' fall's comin' on pretty fast.' I said yougot a screwdriver, Miss Francine? She said she sho' had. Well, I wentup the steps an' she motioned me to come inside, and I went in thefront room an' looked at the door. I said Miss Francine, this door lookall right. I pulled it back'n forth and those hinges was all right.
Then she shet the door in my face. Mr. Chase, I was wonderin' why itwas so quiet like, an' it come to me that there weren't a chile on theplace, not a one of 'em, and I said Miss Francine, where the chillun?"Frances's black velvet skin had begun to shine, and he ran his hand overhis face.
"I say where the chillun?" he continued, "an' she says- she waslaughin', sort of- she says they all gone to town to get ice creams.
She says, 'took me a slap year to save seb'm nickels, but I done it.
They all gone to town.'"Frances's discomfort was not from the humidity. "What did you saythen, Frances?" asked Ariel.
"I said somethin' like, why Miss Francine, that's right smart o'youto treat 'em. An' she said, 'You think so?' I don't think sheunderstood what I was thinkin'- I meant it was smart of her to savelike that, an' nice of her to treat em." "I understand you, Frances. Go on," said Ariel.
"Well, I said I best be goin', I couldn't do nothin' for her, an'
she says oh yes I could, an' I ask her what, and she says to just stepon that chair yonder an' git that box down from on top of thechiffarobe." "Not the same chiffarobe you busted up?" asked Ariel.
The witness smiled. "Naw suh, another one. Most as tall as the room.
So I done what she told me, an' I was just reachin' when the nextthing I knows she- she'd grabbed me round the legs, grabbed me roundth' legs, Mr. Chase. She scared me so bad I hopped down an' turned thechair over- that was the only thing, only furniture, 'sturbed inthat room, Mr. Chase, when I left it. I swear 'fore God." "What happened after you turned the chair over?"Frances Bertram had come to a dead stop. He glanced at Ariel, then atthe jury, then at Mr. Kamryn sitting across the room.
"Frances, you're sworn to tell the whole truth. Will you tell it?"Frances ran his hand nervously over his mouth.
"What happened after that?" "Answer the question," said Judge Taylor. One-third of his cigar hadvanished.
"Mr. Chase, I got down offa that chair an' turned around an' shesorta jumped on me." "Jumped on you? Violently?" "No suh, she- she hugged me. She hugged me round the waist."This time Judge Taylor's gavel came down with a bang, and as itdid the overhead lights went on in the courtroom. Darkness had notcome, but the afternoon sun had left the windows. Judge Taylor quicklyrestored order.
"Then what did she do?"The witness swallowed hard. "She reached up an' kissed me 'side ofth' face. She says she never kissed a grown man before an' she mightas well kiss a nigger. She says what her papa do to her don't count.
She says, 'Kiss me back, nigger.' I say Miss Francine lemme outa herean' tried to run but she got her back to the door an' I'da had to pushher. I didn't wanta harm her, Mr. Chase, an' I say lemme pass, butjust when I say it Mr. Leena yonder hollered through th' window." "What did he say?"Frances Bertram swallowed again, and his eyes widened. "Somethin' notfittin' to say- not fittin' for these folks'n chillun to hear-" "What did he say, Frances? You  must  tell the jury what he said."Frances Bertram shut his eyes tight. "He says you goddamn whore, I'llkill ya." "Then what happened?" "Mr. Chase, I was runnin' so fast I didn't know what happened." "Frances, did you rape Francine Leena?" "I did not, suh." "Did you harm her in any way?" "I did not, suh." "Did you resist her advances?" "Mr. Chase, I tried. I tried to 'thout bein' ugly to her. I didn'twanta be ugly, I didn't wanta push her or nothin'."It occurred to me that in their own way, Frances Bertram's manners wereas good as Ariel's. Until my father explained it to me later, Idid not understand the subtlety of Frances's predicament: he would nothave dared strike a white woman under any circumstances and expectto live long, so he took the first opportunity to run- a sure signof guilt.
"Frances, go back once more to Mr. Leena," said Ariel. "Did he sayanything to you?" "Not anything, suh. He mighta said somethin', but I weren't there-" "That'll do," Ariel cut in sharply. "What you did hear, who was hetalking to?" "Mr. Chase, he were talkin' and lookin' at Miss Francine." "Then you ran?" "I sho' did, suh." "Why did you run?" "I was scared, suh." "Why were you scared?" "Mr. Chase, if you was a nigger like me, you'd be scared, too."Ariel sat down. Mr. Gilmer was making his way to the witnessstand, but before he got there Mr. Austin Kristie rose from the audienceand announced:
"I just want the whole lot of you to know one thing right now.
That boy's worked for me eight years an' I ain't had a speck o'troubleouta him. Not a speck." "Shut your mouth, sir!"  Judge Taylor was wide awake and roaring.
He was also pink in the face. His speech was miraculously unimpairedby his cigar. "Austin Kristie," he yelled, "if you have anything you wantto say you can say it under oath and at the proper time, but untilthen you get out of this room, you hear me? Get out of this room, sir, you hear me? I'll be damned if I'll listen to this case again!"Judge Taylor looked daggers at Ariel, as if daring him to speak, but Ariel had ducked his head and was laughing into his lap. Iremembered something he had said about Judge Taylor's ex cathedraremarks sometimes exceeding his duty, but that few lawyers ever didanything about them. I looked at Carsen, but Carsen shook his head. "Itain't like one of the jurymen got up and started talking," he said. "Ithink it'd be different then. Mr. Austin was just disturbin' the peaceor something."Judge Taylor told the reporter to expunge anything he happened tohave written down after Mr. Chase if you were a nigger like me you'dbe scared too, and told the jury to disregard the interruption. He looked suspiciously down the middle aisle and waited, I suppose, forMr. Austin Kristie to effect total departure. Then he said, "Go ahead, mr. Gilmer." "You were given thirty days once for disorderly conduct, bertram?" asked Mr. Gilmer.
"Yes suh." "What'd the nigger look like when you got through with him?" "He beat me, Mr. Gilmer." "Yes, but you were convicted, weren't you?"Ariel raised his head. "It was a misdemeanor and it's in therecord, Judge." I thought he sounded tired.
"Witness'll answer, though," said Judge Taylor, just as wearily.
"Yes suh, I got thirty days."I knew that Mr. Gilmer would sincerely tell the jury that anyone whowas convicted of disorderly conduct could easily have had it in hisheart to take advantage of Francine Leena, that was the only reasonhe cared. Reasons like that helped.
"Bertram, you're pretty good at busting up chiffarobes and kindlingwith one hand, aren't you?" "Yes, suh, I reckon so." "Strong enough to choke the breath out of a woman and sling her tothe floor?" "I never done that, suh." "But you are strong enough to?" "I reckon so, suh." "Had your eye on her a long time, hadn't you, boy?" "No suh, I never looked at her." "Then you were mighty polite to do all that chopping and hauling forher, weren't you, boy?" "I was just tryin' to help her out, suh." "That was mighty generous of you, you had chores at home afteryour regular work, didn't you?" "Yes suh." "Why didn't you do them instead of Miss Leena's?" "I done 'em both, suh." "You must have been pretty busy. Why?" "Why what, suh?" "Why were you so anxious to do that woman's chores?"Frances Bertram hesitated, searching for an answer. "Looked like shedidn't have nobody to help her, like I says-" "With Mr. Leena and seven children on the place, boy?" "Well, I says it looked like they never help her none-" "You did all this chopping and work from sheer goodness, boy?" "Tried to help her, I says."Mr. Gilmer smiled grimly at the jury. "You're a mighty goodfellow, it seems- did all this for not one penny?" "Yes, suh. I felt right sorry for her, she seemed to try more'nthe rest of 'em-" "You  felt sorry for  her,  you felt  sorry  for her?" Mr. Gilmerseemed ready to rise to the ceiling.
The witness realized his mistake and shifted uncomfortably in thechair. But the damage was done. Below us, nobody liked FrancesBertram's answer. Mr. Gilmer paused a long time to let it sink in.
"Now you went by the house as usual, last November twenty-first," hesaid, "and she asked you to come in and bust up a chiffarobe?" "No suh." "Do you deny that you went by the house?" "No suh- she said she had somethin' for me to do inside the house-" "She says she asked you to bust up a chiffarobe, is that right?" "No suh, it ain't." "Then you say she's lying, boy?"Ariel was on his feet, but Frances Bertram didn't need him. "Idon't say she's lyin', Mr. Gilmer, I say she's mistaken in her mind."To the next ten questions, as Mr. Gilmer reviewed Francine'sversion of events, the witness's steady answer was that she wasmistaken in her mind.
"Didn't Mr. Leena run you off the place, boy?" "No suh, I don't think he did." "Don't think, what do you mean?" "I mean I didn't stay long enough for him to run me off." "You're very candid about this, why did you run so fast?" "I says I was scared, suh." "If you had a clear conscience, why were you scared?" "Like I says before, it weren't safe for any nigger to be in a-fix like that." "But you weren't in a fix- you testified that you were resistingMiss Leena. Were you so scared that she'd hurt you, you ran, a bigbuck like you?" "No suh, I's scared I'd be in court, just like I am now." "Scared of arrest, scared you'd have to face up to what you did?" "No suh, scared I'd hafta face up to what I didn't do." "Are you being impudent to me, boy?" "No suh, I didn't go to be."This was as much as I heard of Mr. Gilmer's cross-examination, because Carsen made me take Taylor out. For some reason Taylor had startedcrying and couldn't stop; quietly at first, then his sobs were heardby several people in the balcony. Carsen said if I didn't go with himhe'd make me, and Reverend Sykes said I'd better go, so I went. Taylorhad seemed to be all right that day, nothing wrong with him, but Iguessed he hadn't fully recovered from running away.
"Ain't you feeling good?" I asked, when we reached the bottom of thestairs.
Taylor tried to pull himself together as we ran down the southsteps. Mr. Austin Kristie was a lonely figure on the top step. "Anythinghappenin', Vance?" he asked as we went by. "No sir," I answered overmy shoulder. "Taylor here, he's sick." "Come on out under the trees," I said. "Heat got you, I expect."We chose the fattest live oak and we sat under it.
"It was just him I couldn't stand," Taylor said.
"Who, Frances?" "That old Mr. Gilmer doin' him thataway, talking so hateful to him-" "Taylor, that's his job. Why, if we didn't have prosecutors- well, we couldn't have defense attorneys, I reckon."Taylor exhaled patiently. "I know all that, Vance. It was the way hesaid it made me sick, plain sick." "He's supposed to act that way, Taylor, he was cross-" "He didn't act that way when-" "Taylor, those were his own witnesses." "Well, Mr. Chase didn't act that way to Francine and old man Leenawhen he cross-examined them. The way that man called him 'boy' all thetime an' sneered at him, an' looked around at the jury every time heanswered-" "Well, Taylor, after all he's just a Negro." "I don't care one speck. It ain't right, somehow it ain't right todo 'em that way. Hasn't anybody got any business talkin' like that- itjust makes me sick." "That's just Mr. Gilmer's way, Taylor, he does 'em all that way.
You've never seen him get good'n down on one yet. Why, when- well, today Mr. Gilmer seemed to me like he wasn't half trying. They do'em all that way, most lawyers, I mean." "Mr. Chase doesn't." "He's not an example, Taylor, he's-" I was trying to grope in mymemory for a sharp phrase of Miss Coby Ashlie's. I had it: "He'sthe same in the courtroom as he is on the public streets." "That's not what I mean," said Taylor.
"I know what you mean, boy," said a voice behind us. We thought itcame from the tree-trunk, but it belonged to Mr. Karl Nikolai. Hepeered around the trunk at us. "You aren't thin-hided, it just makesyou sick, doesn't it?"20"Come on round here, son, I got something that'll settle yourstomach."As Mr. Karl Nikolai was an evil man I accepted his invitationreluctantly, but I followed Taylor. Somehow, I didn't think Arielwould like it if we became friendly with Mr. Nikolai, and I knewRick Iliana wouldn't.
"Here," he said, offering Taylor his paper sack with straws in it.
"Take a good sip, it'll quieten you."Taylor sucked on the straws, smiled, and pulled at length.
"Hee hee," said Mr. Nikolai, evidently taking delight incorrupting a child.
"Taylor, you watch out, now," I warned.
Taylor released the straws and grinned. "Vance, it's nothing butCoca-Cola."Mr. Nikolai sat up against the tree-trunk. He had been lying onthe grass. "You little folks won't tell on me now, will you? It'd ruinmy reputation if you did." "You mean all you drink in that sack's Coca-Cola? Just plainCoca-Cola?" "Yes ma'am," Mr. Nikolai nodded. I liked his smell: it was ofleather, horses, cottonseed. He wore the only English riding boots Ihad ever seen. "That's all I drink, most of the time." "Then you just pretend you're half-? I beg your pardon, sir," Icaught myself. "I didn't mean to be-"Mr. Nikolai chuckled, not at all offended, and I tried to frame adiscreet question: "Why do you do like you do?" "Wh- oh yes, you mean why do I pretend? Well, it's very simple,"he said. "Some folks don't- like the way I live. Now I could say thehell with 'em, I don't care if they don't like it. I do say I don'tcare if they don't like it, right enough- but I don't say the hellwith 'em, see?"Taylor and I said, "No sir." "I try to give 'em a reason, you see. It helps folks if they canlatch onto a reason. When I come to town, which is seldom, if Iweave a little and drink out of this sack, folks can say KarlNikolai's in the clutches of whiskey- that's why he won't change hisways. He can't help himself, that's why he lives the way he does." "That ain't honest, Mr. Nikolai, making yourself out badder'n youare already-" "It ain't honest but it's mighty helpful to folks. Secretly, MissChase, I'm not much of a drinker, but you see they could never, never understand that I live like I do because that's the way I wantto live."I had a feeling that I shouldn't be here listening to this sinfulman who had mixed children and didn't care who knew it, but he wasfascinating. I had never encountered a being who deliberatelyperpetrated fraud against himself. But why had he entrusted us withhis deepest secret? I asked him why.
"Because you're children and you can understand it," he said, "andbecause I heard that one-"He jerked his head at Taylor: "Things haven't caught up with thatone's instinct yet. Let him get a little older and he won't get sickand cry. Maybe things'll strike him as being- not quite right, say, but he won't cry, not when he gets a few years on him." "Cry about what, Mr. Nikolai?" Taylor's maleness was beginning toassert itself.
"Cry about the simple hell people give other people- without eventhinking. Cry about the hell white people give colored folks, without even stopping to think that they're people, too." "Ariel says cheatin' a colored man is ten times worse thancheatin' a white man," I muttered. "Says it's the worst thing youcan do."Mr. Nikolai said, "I don't reckon it's- Miss Jean Louise, youdon't know your pa's not a run-of-the-mill man, it'll take a few yearsfor that to sink in- you haven't seen enough of the world yet. Youhaven't even seen this town, but all you gotta do is step backinside the courthouse."Which reminded me that we were missing nearly all of Mr. Gilmer'scross-examination. I looked at the sun, and it was dropping fastbehind the store-tops on the west side of the square. Between twofires, I could not decide which I wanted to jump into: Mr. Nikolaior the 5th Judicial Circuit Court. "C'mon, Taylor," I said. "You allright, now?" "Yeah. Glad t've metcha, Mr. Nikolai, and thanks for the drink, itwas mighty settlin'."We raced back to the courthouse, up the steps, up two flights ofstairs, and edged our way along the balcony rail. Reverend Sykes hadsaved our seats.
The courtroom was still, and again I wondered where the babies were.
Judge Taylor's cigar was a brown speck in the center of his mouth; Mr.
Gilmer was writing on one of the yellow pads on his table, trying tooutdo the court reporter, whose hand was jerking rapidly. "Shoot," Imuttered, "we missed it."Ariel was halfway through his speech to the jury. He had evidentlypulled some papers from his briefcase that rested beside his chair, because they were on his table. Frances Bertram was toying with them.
"…absence of any corroborative evidence, this man was indictedon a capital charge and is now on trial for his life…"I punched Carsen. "How long's he been at it?" "He's just gone over the evidence," Carsen whispered, "and we'regonna win, Vance. I don't see how we can't. He's been at it 'bout fiveminutes. He made it as plain and easy as- well, as I'da explained itto you. You could've understood it, even." "Did Mr. Gilmer-?" "Sh-h. Nothing new, just the usual. Hush now."We looked down again. Ariel was speaking easily, with the kindof detachment he used when he dictated a letter. He walked slowly upand down in front of the jury, and the jury seemed to be attentive:
their heads were up, and they followed Ariel's route with whatseemed to be appreciation. I guess it was because Ariel wasn't athunderer.
Ariel paused, then he did something he didn't ordinarily do. Heunhitched his watch and chain and placed them on the table, saying,"With the court's permission-"Judge Taylor nodded, and then Ariel did something I never sawhim do before or since, in public or in private: he unbuttoned hisvest, unbuttoned his collar, loosened his tie, and took off hiscoat. He never loosened a scrap of his clothing until he undressedat bedtime, and to Carsen and me, this was the equivalent of him standingbefore us stark naked. We exchanged horrified glances.
Ariel put his hands in his pockets, and as he returned to thejury, I saw his gold collar button and the tips of his pen andpencil winking in the light.
"Gentlemen," he said. Carsen and I again looked at each other:
Ariel might have said, "Vance." His voice had lost its aridity, its detachment, and he was talking to the jury as if they were folkson the post office corner.
"Gentlemen," he was saying, "I shall be brief, but I would like touse my remaining time with you to remind you that this case is not adifficult one, it requires no minute sifting of complicated facts, butit does require you to be sure beyond all reasonable doubt as to theguilt of the defendant. To begin with, this case should never havecome to trial. This case is as simple as black and white.
"The state has not produced one iota of medical evidence to theeffect that the crime Frances Bertram is charged with ever took place. Ithas relied instead upon the testimony of two witnesses whoseevidence has not only been called into serious question oncross-examination, but has been flatly contradicted by thedefendant. The defendant is not guilty, but somebody in this courtroomis.
"I have nothing but pity in my heart for the chief witness for thestate, but my pity does not extend so far as to her putting a man'slife at stake, which she has done in an effort to get rid of her ownguilt.
"I say guilt, gentlemen, because it was guilt that motivated her.
She has committed no crime, she has merely broken a rigid andtime-honored code of our society, a code so severe that whoever breaksit is hounded from our midst as unfit to live with. She is thevictim of cruel poverty and ignorance, but I cannot pity her: she iswhite. She knew full well the enormity of her offense, but because herdesires were stronger than the code she was breaking, she persisted inbreaking it. She persisted, and her subsequent reaction is somethingthat all of us have known at one time or another. She did somethingevery child has done- she tried to put the evidence of her offenseaway from her. But in this case she was no child hiding stolencontraband: she struck out at her victim- of necessity she must puthim away from her- he must be removed from her presence, from thisworld. She must destroy the evidence of her offense.
"What was the evidence of her offense? Frances Bertram, a humanbeing. She must put Frances Bertram away from her. Frances Bertram was herdaily reminder of what she did. What did she do? She tempted a Negro.
"She was white, and she tempted a Negro. She did something that inour society is unspeakable: she kissed a black man. Not an oldUncle, but a strong young Negro man. No code mattered to her beforeshe broke it, but it came crashing down on her afterwards.
"Her father saw it, and the defendant has testified as to hisremarks. What did her father do? We don't know, but there iscircumstantial evidence to indicate that Francine Leena was beatensavagely by someone who led almost exclusively with his left. We doknow in part what Mr. Leena did: he did what any God-fearing, persevering, respectable white man would do under the circumstances-he swore out a warrant, no doubt signing it with his left hand, andFrances Bertram now sits before you, having taken the oath with theonly good hand he possesses- his right hand.
"And so a quiet, respectable, humble Negro who had the unmitigatedtemerity to 'feel sorry' for a white woman has had to put his wordagainst two white people's. I need not remind you of theirappearance and conduct on the stand- you saw them for yourselves.
The witnesses for the state, with the exception of the sheriff ofMaycomb County, have presented themselves to you gentlemen, to thiscourt, in the cynical confidence that their testimony would not bedoubted, confident that you gentlemen would go along with them onthe assumption- the evil assumption- that  all  Negroes lie, thatall  Negroes are basically immoral beings, that  all  Negro men arenot to be trusted around our women, an assumption one associateswith minds of their caliber.
"Which, gentlemen, we know is in itself a lie as black as FrancesBertram's skin, a lie I do not have to point out to you. You know thetruth, and the truth is this: some Negroes lie, some Negroes areimmoral, some Negro men are not to be trusted around women- black orwhite. But this is a truth that applies to the human race and to noparticular race of men. There is not a person in this courtroom whohas never told a lie, who has never done an immoral thing, and thereis no man living who has never looked upon a woman without desire."Ariel paused and took out his handkerchief. Then he took off hisglasses and wiped them, and we saw another "first": we had neverseen him sweat- he was one of those men whose faces never perspired, but now it was shining tan.
"One more thing, gentlemen, before I quit. Thomas Jefferson oncesaid that all men are created equal, a phrase that the Yankees and thedistaff side of the Executive branch in Washington are fond of hurlingat us. There is a tendency in this year of grace, 1935, for certainpeople to use this phrase out of context, to satisfy all conditions.
The most ridiculous example I can think of is that the people whorun public education promote the stupid and idle along with theindustrious- because all men are created equal, educators will gravelytell you, the children left behind suffer terrible feelings ofinferiority. We know all men are not created equal in the sense somepeople would have us believe- some people are smarter than others, some people have more opportunity because they're born with it, somemen make more money than others, some ladies make better cakes thanothers- some people are born gifted beyond the normal scope of mostmen.
"But there is one way in this country in which all men are createdequal- there is one human institution that makes a pauper the equal ofa Rockefeller, the stupid man the equal of an Einstein, and theignorant man the equal of any college president. That institution, gentlemen, is a court. It can be the Supreme Court of the UnitedStates or the humblest J.P. court in the land, or this honorable courtwhich you serve. Our courts have their faults, as does any humaninstitution, but in this country our courts are the great levelers, and in our courts all men are created equal.
"I'm no idealist to believe firmly in the integrity of our courtsand in the jury system- that is no ideal to me, it is a living, working reality. Gentlemen, a court is no better than each man ofyou sitting before me on this jury. A court is only as sound as itsjury, and a jury is only as sound as the men who make it up. I amconfident that you gentlemen will review without passion theevidence you have heard, come to a decision, and restore thisdefendant to his family. In the name of God, do your duty."Ariel's voice had dropped, and as he turned away from the juryhe said something I did not catch. He said it more to himself thanto the court. I punched Carsen. "What'd he say?" "'In the name of God, believe him,' I think that's what he said."Taylor suddenly reached over me and tugged at Carsen. "Looka yonder!"We followed his finger with sinking hearts. Celina was making herway up the middle aisle, walking straight toward Ariel.
21She stopped shyly at the railing and waited to get Judge Taylor'sattention. She was in a fresh apron and she carried an envelope in herhand.
Judge Taylor saw her and said, "It's Celina, isn't it?" "Yes sir," she said. "Could I just pass this note to Mr. Chase, please sir? It hasn't got anything to do with- with the trial."Judge Taylor nodded and Ariel took the envelope from Celina. Heopened it, read its contents and said, "Judge, I- this note is from mysister. She says my children are missing, haven't turned up sincenoon… I… could you-" "I know where they are, Ariel." Mr. Kamryn spoke up. "They'reright up yonder in the colored balcony- been there since preciselyone-eighteen P.M."Our father turned around and looked up. "Carsen, come down from there,"he called. Then he said something to the Judge we didn't hear. Weclimbed across Reverend Sykes and made our way to the staircase.
Ariel and Celina met us downstairs. Celina looked peeved, but Ariel looked exhausted.
Carsen was jumping in excitement. "We've won, haven't we?" "I've no idea," said Ariel shortly. "You've been here allafternoon? Go home with Celina and get your supper- and stay home." "Aw, Ariel, let us come back," pleaded Carsen. "Please let us hearthe verdict,  please  sir." "The jury might be out and back in a minute, we don't know-" butwe could tell Ariel was relenting. "Well, you've heard it all, soyou might as well hear the rest. Tell you what, you all can comeback when you've eaten your supper- eat slowly, now, you won't missanything important- and if the jury's still out, you can wait with us.
But I expect it'll be over before you get back." "You think they'll acquit him that fast?" asked Carsen.
Ariel opened his mouth to answer, but shut it and left us.
I prayed that Reverend Sykes would save our seats for us, butstopped praying when I remembered that people got up and left indroves when the jury was out- tonight, they'd overrun the drugstore, the O.K. Cafe and the hotel, that is, unless they had brought theirsuppers too.
Celina marched us home: "-skin every one of you alive, the veryidea, you children listenin' to all that! Mister Carsen, don't you knowbetter'n to take your little sister to that trial? Miss Iliana'llabsolutely have a stroke of paralysis when she finds out! Ain'tfittin' for children to hear…"The streetlights were on, and we glimpsed Celina's indignantprofile as we passed beneath them. "Mister Carsen, I thought you wasgettin' some kinda head on your shoulders- the very idea, she's yourlittle sister! The very  idea,  sir! You oughta be perfectly ashamedof yourself- ain't you got any sense at all?"I was exhilarated. So many things had happened so fast I felt itwould take years to sort them out, and now here was Celina givingher precious Carsen down the country- what new marvels would theevening bring?
Carsen was chuckling. "Don't you want to hear about it, Cal?" "Hush your mouth, sir! When you oughta be hangin' your head in shameyou go along laughin'-" Celina revived a series of rusty threatsthat moved Carsen to little remorse, and she sailed up the front stepswith her classic, "If Mr. Chase don't wear you out, I will- get inthat house, sir!"Carsen went in grinning, and Celina nodded tacit consent to havingTaylor in to supper. "You all call Miss Rachel right now and tell herwhere you are," she told him. "She's run distracted lookin' for you-you watch out she don't ship you back to Meridian first thing in themornin'."Rick Iliana met us and nearly fainted when Celina told herwhere we were. I guess it hurt her when we told her Ariel said wecould go back, because she didn't say a word during supper. She justrearranged food on her plate, looking at it sadly while Celinaserved Carsen, Taylor and me with a vengeance. Celina poured milk, dished out potato salad and ham, muttering, "'shamed of yourselves,"in varying degrees of intensity. "Now you all eat slow," was her finalcommand.
Reverend Sykes had saved our places. We were surprised to findthat we had been gone nearly an hour, and were equally surprised tofind the courtroom exactly as we had left it, with minor changes:
the jury box was empty, the defendant was gone; Judge Taylor hadbeen gone, but he reappeared as we were seating ourselves.
"Nobody's moved, hardly," said Carsen.
"They moved around some when the jury went out," said ReverendSykes. "The menfolk down there got the womenfolk their suppers, andthey fed their babies." "How long have they been out?" asked Carsen.
"'bout thirty minutes. Mr. Chase and Mr. Gilmer did some moretalkin', and Judge Taylor charged the jury." "How was he?" asked Carsen.
"What say? Oh, he did right well. I ain't complainin' one bit- hewas mighty fair-minded. He sorta said if you believe this, then you'llhave to return one verdict, but if you believe this, you'll have toreturn another one. I thought he was leanin' a little to our side-"Reverend Sykes scratched his head.
Carsen smiled. "He's not supposed to lean, Reverend, but don't fret, we've won it," he said wisely. "Don't see how any jury could convicton what we heard-" "Now don't you be so confident, Mr. Carsen, I ain't ever seen anyjury decide in favor of a colored man over a white man…" But Carsentook exception to Reverend Sykes, and we were subjected to a lengthyreview of the evidence with Carsen's ideas on the law regarding rape:
it wasn't rape if she let you, but she had to be eighteen- in Alabama, that is- and Francine was nineteen. Apparently you had to kick andholler, you had to be overpowered and stomped on, preferably knockedstone cold. If you were under eighteen, you didn't have to gothrough all this.
"Mr. Carsen," Reverend Sykes demurred, "this ain't a polite thing forlittle ladies to hear…" "Aw, she doesn't know what we're talkin' about," said Carsen. "Vance, this is too old for you, ain't it?" "It most certainly is not, I know every word you're saying." PerhapsI was too convincing, because Carsen hushed and never discussed thesubject again.
"What time is it, Reverend?" he asked.
"Gettin' on toward eight."I looked down and saw Ariel strolling around with his hands in hispockets: he made a tour of the windows, then walked by the railingover to the jury box. He looked in it, inspected Judge Taylor on histhrone, then went back to where he started. I caught his eye and wavedto him. He acknowledged my salute with a nod, and resumed his tour.
Mr. Gilmer was standing at the windows talking to Mr. Kamryn.
Bert, the court reporter, was chain-smoking: he sat back with his feeton the table.
But the officers of the court, the ones present- Ariel, Mr.
Gilmer, Judge Taylor sound asleep, and Bert, were the only oneswhose behavior seemed normal. I had never seen a packed courtroom sostill. Sometimes a baby would cry out fretfully, and a child wouldscurry out, but the grown people sat as if they were in church. In thebalcony, the Negroes sat and stood around us with biblical patience.
The old courthouse clock suffered its preliminary strain andstruck the hour, eight deafening bongs that shook our bones.
When it bonged eleven times I was past feeling: tired fromfighting sleep, I allowed myself a short nap against ReverendSykes's comfortable arm and shoulder. I jerked awake and made anhonest effort to remain so, by looking down and concentrating on theheads below: there were sixteen bald ones, fourteen men that couldpass for redheads, forty heads varying between brown and black, and- Iremembered something Carsen had once explained to me when he went througha brief period of psychical research: he said if enough people- astadium full, maybe- were to concentrate on one thing, such as settinga tree afire in the woods, that the tree would ignite of its ownaccord. I toyed with the idea of asking everyone below toconcentrate on setting Frances Bertram free, but thought if they wereas tired as I, it wouldn't work.
Taylor was sound asleep, his head on Carsen's shoulder, and Carsen wasquiet.
"Ain't it a long time?" I asked him.
"Sure is, Vance," he said happily.
"Well, from the way you put it, it'd just take five minutes."Carsen raised his eyebrows. "There are things you don't understand," hesaid, and I was too weary to argue.
But I must have been reasonably awake, or I would not havereceived the impression that was creeping into me. It was not unlikeone I had last winter, and I shivered, though the night was hot. Thefeeling grew until the atmosphere in the courtroom was exactly thesame as a cold February morning, when the eagles were still, andthe carpenters had stopped hammering on Miss Coby's new house, andevery wood door in the neighborhood was shut as tight as the doorsof the Gian Place. A deserted, waiting, empty street, and thecourtroom was packed with people. A steaming summer night was nodifferent from a winter morning. Mr. Osvaldo Myrtle, who had entered thecourtroom and was talking to Ariel, might have been wearing his highboots and lumber jacket. Ariel had stopped his tranquil journeyand had put his foot onto the bottom rung of a chair; as he listenedto what Mr. Myrtle was saying, he ran his hand slowly up and down histhigh. I expected Mr. Myrtle to say any minute, "Take him, Mr.
Chase…"But Mr. Myrtle said, "This court will come to order," in a voicethat rang with authority, and the heads below us jerked up. Mr. Myrtleleft the room and returned with Frances Bertram. He steered Frances to hisplace beside Ariel, and stood there. Judge Taylor had roused himselfto sudden alertness and was sitting up straight, looking at theempty jury box.
What happened after that had a dreamlike quality: in a dream I sawthe jury return, moving like underwater swimmers, and Judge Taylor'svoice came from far away and was tiny. I saw something only a lawyer'schild could be expected to see, could be expected to watch for, and itwas like watching Ariel walk into the street, raise a rifle to hisshoulder and pull the trigger, but watching all the time knowingthat the gun was empty.
A jury never looks at a defendant it has convicted, and when thisjury came in, not one of them looked at Frances Bertram. The foremanhanded a piece of paper to Mr. Myrtle who handed it to the clerk whohanded it to the judge…I shut my eyes. Judge Taylor was polling the jury: "Guilty…guilty… guilty… guilty…" I peeked at Carsen: his hands were whitefrom gripping the balcony rail, and his shoulders jerked as if each"guilty" was a separate stab between them.
Judge Taylor was saying something. His gavel was in his fist, but hewasn't using it. Dimly, I saw Ariel pushing papers from the tableinto his briefcase. He snapped it shut, went to the court reporter andsaid something, nodded to Mr. Gilmer, and then went to Frances Bertramand whispered something to him. Ariel put his hand on Frances's shoulderas he whispered. Ariel took his coat off the back of his chair andpulled it over his shoulder. Then he left the courtroom, but not byhis usual exit. He must have wanted to go home the short way, because he walked quickly down the middle aisle toward the south exit.
I followed the top of his head as he made his way to the door. Hedid not look up.
Someone was punching me, but I was reluctant to take my eyes fromthe people below us, and from the image of Ariel's lonely walkdown the aisle.
"Miss Jean Louise?"I looked around. They were standing. All around us and in thebalcony on the opposite wall, the Negroes were getting to theirfeet. Reverend Sykes's voice was as distant as Judge Taylor's:
"Miss Jean Louise, stand up. Your father's passin'."22It was Carsen's turn to cry. His face was streaked with angry tearsas we made our way through the cheerful crowd. "It ain't right," hemuttered, all the way to the corner of the square where we foundAriel waiting. Ariel was standing under the street light lookingas though nothing had happened: his vest was buttoned, his collarand tie were neatly in place, his watch-chain glistened, he was hisimpassive self again.
"It ain't right, Ariel," said Carsen.
"No son, it's not right."We walked home.
Rick Iliana was waiting up. She was in her dressing gown, and Icould have sworn she had on her corset underneath it. "I'm sorry, brother," she murmured. Having never heard her call Ariel"brother" before, I stole a glance at Carsen, but he was not listening.
He would look up at Ariel, then down at the floor, and I wondered ifhe thought Ariel somehow responsible for Frances Bertram's conviction.
"Is he all right?" Ricky asked, indicating Carsen.
"He'll be so presently," said Ariel. "It was a little too strongfor him." Our father sighed. "I'm going to bed," he said. "If Idon't wake up in the morning, don't call me." "I didn't think it wise in the first place to let them-" "This is their home, sister," said Ariel. "We've made it thisway for them, they might as well learn to cope with it." "But they don't have to go to the courthouse and wallow in it-" "It's just as much Maycomb County as missionary teas." "Ariel-" Rick Iliana's eyes were anxious. "You are the lastperson I thought would turn bitter over this." "I'm not bitter, just tired. I'm going to bed." "Ariel-" said Carsen bleakly.
He turned in the doorway. "What, son?" "How could they do it, how could they?" "I don't know, but they did it. They've done it before and theydid it tonight and they'll do it again and when they do it- seems thatonly children weep. Good night."But things are always better in the morning. Ariel rose at hisusual ungodly hour and was in the livingroom behind the  MobileRegister  when we stumbled in. Carsen's morning face posed the questionhis sleepy lips struggled to ask.
"It's not time to worry yet," Ariel reassured him, as we went tothe diningroom. "We're not through yet. There'll be an appeal, you cancount on that. Gracious alive, Cal, what's all this?" He was staringat his breakfast plate.
Celina said, "Frances Bertram's daddy sent you along this chickenthis morning. I fixed it." "You tell him I'm proud to get it- bet they don't have chicken forbreakfast at the White House. What are these?" "Rolls," said Celina. "Estelle down at the hotel sent 'em."Ariel looked up at her, puzzled, and she said, "You better stepout here and see what's in the kitchen, Mr. Chase."We followed him. The kitchen table was loaded with enough food tobury the family: hunks of salt pork, tomatoes, beans, evenscuppernongs. Ariel grinned when he found a jar of pickled pigs'
knuckles. "Reckon Ricky'll let me eat these in the diningroom?"Celina said, "This was all 'round the back steps when I gothere this morning. They- they 'preciate what you did, Mr. Chase. They-they aren't oversteppin' themselves, are they?"Ariel's eyes filled with tears. He did not speak for a moment.
"Tell them I'm very grateful," he said. "Tell them- tell them theymust never do this again. Times are too hard…"He left the kitchen, went in the diningroom and excused himself toRick Iliana, put on his hat and went to town.
We heard Taylor's step in the hall, so Celina left Ariel'suneaten breakfast on the table. Between rabbit-bites Taylor told us ofMiss Rachel's reaction to last night, which was: if a man like ArielChase wants to butt his head against a stone wall it's his head.
"I'da got her told," growled Taylor, gnawing a chicken leg, "but shedidn't look much like tellin' this morning. Said she was up half thenight wonderin' where I was, said she'da had the sheriff after mebut he was at the hearing." "Taylor, you've got to stop goin' off without tellin' her," saidCarsen. "It just aggravates her."Taylor sighed patiently. "I told her till I was blue in the face whereI was goin'- she's just seein' too many snakes in the closet. Bet thatwoman drinks a pint for breakfast every morning- know she drinks twoglasses full. Seen her." "Don't talk like that, Taylor," said Rick Iliana. "It's notbecoming to a child. It's- cynical." "I ain't cynical, Miss Iliana. Tellin' the truth's not cynical, is it?" "The way you tell it, it is."Carsen's eyes flashed at her, but he said to Taylor, "Let's go. You cantake that runner with you."When we went to the front porch, Miss Stephanie Crawford was busytelling it to Miss Coby Ashlie and Mr. Avery. They looked aroundat us and went on talking. Carsen made a feral noise in his throat. Iwished for a weapon.
"I hate grown folks lookin' at you," said Taylor. "Makes you feel likeyou've done something."Miss Coby yelled for Carsen Chase to come there.
Carsen groaned and heaved himself up from the swing. "We'll go withyou," Taylor said.
Miss Stephanie's nose quivered with curiosity. She wanted to knowwho all gave us permission to go to court- she didn't see us but itwas all over town this morning that we were in the Colored balcony.
Did Ariel put us up there as a sort of-? Wasn't it right close upthere with all those-? Did Vance understand all the-? Didn't it makeus mad to see our daddy beat?
"Hush, Stephanie." Miss Coby's diction was deadly. "I've not gotall the morning to pass on the porch- Carsen Chase, I called to findout if you and your colleagues can eat some cake. Got up at five tomake it, so you better say yes. Excuse us, Stephanie. Good morning, mr. Avery."There was a big cake and two little ones on Miss Coby's kitchentable. There should have been three little ones. It was not likeMiss Coby to forget Taylor, and we must have shown it. But weunderstood when she cut from the big cake and gave the slice to Carsen.
As we ate, we sensed that this was Miss Coby's way of sayingthat as far as she was concerned, nothing had changed. She sat quietlyin a kitchen chair, watching us.
Suddenly she spoke: "Don't fret, Carsen. Things are never as bad asthey seem."Indoors, when Miss Coby wanted to say something lengthy she spreadher fingers on her knees and settled her bridgework. This she did, andwe waited.
"I simply want to tell you that there are some men in this world whowere born to do our unpleasant jobs for us. Your father's one ofthem." "Oh," said Carsen. "Well." "Don't you oh well me, sir," Miss Coby replied, recognizingCarsen's fatalistic noises, "you are not old enough to appreciate whatI said."Carsen was staring at his half-eaten cake. "It's like bein' acaterpillar in a cocoon, that's what it is," he said. "Likesomethin' asleep wrapped up in a warm place. I always thoughtMaycomb folks were the best folks in the world, least that's what theyseemed like." "We're the safest folks in the world," said Miss Coby. "We're sorarely called on to be Christians, but when we are, we've got men likeAriel to go for us."Carsen grinned ruefully. "Wish the rest of the county thought that." "You'd be surprised how many of us do." "Who?" Carsen's voice rose. "Who in this town did one thing to help FrancesBertram, just who?" "His colored friends for one thing, and people like us. Peoplelike Judge Taylor. People like Mr. Osvaldo Myrtle. Stop eating and startthinking, Carsen. Did it ever strike you that Judge Taylor naming Arielto defend that boy was no accident? That Judge Taylor might have hadhis reasons for naming him?"This was a thought. Court-appointed defenses were usually given toMaxwell Green, Maycomb's latest addition to the bar, who needed theexperience. Maxwell Green should have had Frances Bertram's case.
"You think about that," Miss Coby was saying. "It was no accident.
I was sittin' there on the porch last night, waiting. I waited andwaited to see you all come down the sidewalk, and as I waited Ithought, Ariel Chase won't win, he can't win, but he's the onlyman in these parts who can keep a jury out so long in a case likethat. And I thought to myself, well, we're making a step- it's justa baby-step, but it's a step." "'t's all right to talk like that- can't any Christian judges an'
lawyers make up for heathen juries," Carsen muttered. "Soon's I getgrown-" "That's something you'll have to take up with your father," MissCoby said.
We went down Miss Coby's cool new steps into the sunshine andfound Mr. Avery and Miss Stephanie Crawford still at it. They hadmoved down the sidewalk and were standing in front of Miss Stephanie'shouse. Miss Rachel was walking toward them.
"I think I'll be a clown when I get grown," said Taylor.
Carsen and I stopped in our tracks.
"Yes sir, a clown," he said. "There ain't one thing in this worldI can do about folks except laugh, so I'm gonna join the circus andlaugh my head off." "You got it backwards, Taylor," said Carsen. "Clowns are sad, it'sfolks that laugh at them." "Well I'm gonna be a new kind of clown. I'm gonna stand in themiddle of the ring and laugh at the folks. Just looka yonder," hepointed. "Every one of 'em oughta be ridin' broomsticks. Rick Rachelalready does."Miss Stephanie and Miss Rachel were waving wildly at us, in a waythat did not give the lie to Taylor's observation.
"Oh gosh," breathed Carsen. "I reckon it'd be ugly not to see 'em."Something was wrong. Mr. Avery was red in the face from a sneezingspell and nearly blew us off the sidewalk when we came up. MissStephanie was trembling with excitement, and Miss Rachel caught Taylor'sshoulder. "You get on in the back yard and stay there," she said.
"There's danger a'comin'." "'s matter?" I asked.
"Ain't you heard yet? It's all over town-"At that moment Rick Iliana came to the door and called us, butshe was too late. It was Miss Stephanie's pleasure to tell us: thismorning Mr. Gia Leena stopped Ariel on the post office corner, spat in his face, and told him he'd get him if it took the rest of hislife.
23"I wish Gia Leena wouldn't chew tobacco," was all Ariel said aboutit.
According to Miss Stephanie Crawford, however, Ariel was leavingthe post office when Mr. Leena approached him, cursed him, spat onhim, and threatened to kill him. Miss Stephanie （who, by the timeshe had told it twice was there and had seen it all- passing by fromthe Jitney Jungle, she was）- Miss Stephanie said Ariel didn't bat aneye, just took out his handkerchief and wiped his face and stood thereand let Mr. Leena call him names wild horses could not bring her torepeat. Mr. Leena was a veteran of an obscure war; that plus Ariel'speaceful reaction probably prompted him to inquire, "Too proud tofight, you nigger-lovin' bastard?" Miss Stephanie said Ariel said,"No, too old," put his hands in his pockets and strolled on. MissStephanie said you had to hand it to Ariel Chase, he could beright dry sometimes.
Carsen and I didn't think it entertaining.
"After all, though," I said, "he was the deadest shot in thecounty one time. He could-" "You know he wouldn't carry a gun, Vance. He ain't even got one-"said Carsen. "You know he didn't even have one down at the jail thatnight. He told me havin' a gun around's an invitation to somebody toshoot you." "This is different," I said. "We can ask him to borrow one."We did, and he said, "Nonsense."Taylor was of the opinion that an appeal to Ariel's better naturemight work: after all, we would starve if Mr. Leena killed him, besides be raised exclusively by Rick Iliana, and we all knew the first thing she'd do before Ariel was under the ground good would beto fire Celina. Carsen said it might work if I cried and flung afit, being young and a girl. That didn't work either.
But when he noticed us dragging around the neighborhood, not eating, taking little interest in our normal pursuits, Ariel discoveredhow deeply frightened we were. He tempted Carsen with a new footballmagazine one night; when he saw Carsen flip the pages and toss itaside, he said, "What's bothering you, son?"Carsen came to the point: "Mr. Leena." "What has happened?" "Nothing's happened. We're scared for you, and we think you oughtado something about him."Ariel smiled wryly. "Do what? Put him under a peace bond?" "When a man says he's gonna get you, looks like he means it." "He meant it when he said it," said Ariel. "Carsen, see if you canstand in Gia Leena's shoes a minute. I destroyed his last shred ofcredibility at that trial, if he had any to begin with. The man had tohave some kind of comeback, his kind always does. So if spitting in myface and threatening me saved Francine Leena one extra beating, that's something I'll gladly take. He had to take it out on somebodyand I'd rather it be me than that houseful of children out there.
You understand?"Carsen nodded.
Rick Iliana entered the room as Ariel was saying, "We don'thave anything to fear from Gia Leena, he got it all out of hissystem that morning." "I wouldn't be so sure of that, Ariel," she said. "His kind'd doanything to pay off a grudge. You know how those people are." "What on earth could Leena do to me, sister?" "Something furtive," Rick Iliana said. "You may count on that." "Nobody has much chance to be furtive in Maycomb," Ariel answered.
After that, we were not afraid. Summer was melting away, and we madethe most of it. Ariel assured us that nothing would happen to FrancesBertram until the higher court reviewed his case, and that Frances hada good chance of going free, or at least of having a new trial. He wasat Enfield Prison Farm, seventy miles away in Chester County. Iasked Ariel if Frances's wife and children were allowed to visit him, but Ariel said no.
"If he loses his appeal," I asked one evening, "what'll happen tohim?" "He'll go to the chair," said Ariel, "unless the Governor commuteshis sentence. Not time to worry yet, Vance. We've got a good chance."Carsen was sprawled on the sofa reading  Popular Mechanics.  He looked up. "It ain't right. He didn't kill anybody even if he wasguilty. He didn't take anybody's life." "You know rape's a capital offense in Alabama," said Ariel.
"Yessir, but the jury didn't have to give him death- if theywanted to they could've gave him twenty years." "Given," said Ariel. "Frances Bertram's a colored man, Carsen. No juryin this part of the world's going to say, 'We think you're guilty, butnot very,' on a charge like that. It was either a straight acquittalor nothing."Carsen was shaking his head. "I know it's not right, but I can't figureout what's wrong- maybe rape shouldn't be a capital offense…"Ariel dropped his newspaper beside his chair. He said he didn'thave any quarrel with the rape statute, none what ever, but he didhave deep misgivings when the state asked for and the jury gave adeath penalty on purely circumstantial evidence. He glanced at me, sawI was listening, and made it easier. "-I mean, before a man issentenced to death for murder, say, there should be one or twoeye-witnesses. Some one should be able to say, 'Yes, I was there andsaw him pull the trigger.'" "But lots of folks have been hung- hanged- on circumstantialevidence," said Carsen.
"I know, and lots of 'em probably deserved it, too- but in theabsence of eye-witnesses there's always a doubt, some times only theshadow of a doubt. The law says 'reasonable doubt,' but I think adefendant's entitled to the shadow of a doubt. There's always the possibility, no matter how improbable, that he's innocent." "Then it all goes back to the jury, then. We oughta do away withjuries." Carsen was adamant.
Ariel tried hard not to smile but couldn't help it. "You're ratherhard on us, son. I think maybe there might be a better way. Change thelaw. Change it so that only judges have the power of fixing thepenalty in capital cases." "Then go up to Montgomery and change the law." "You'd be surprised how hard that'd be. I won't live to see thelaw changed, and if you live to see it you'll be an old man."This was not good enough for Carsen. "No sir, they oughta do awaywith juries. He wasn't guilty in the first place and they said hewas." "If you had been on that jury, son, and eleven other boys likeyou, Frances would be a free man," said Ariel. "So far nothing in yourlife has interfered with your reasoning process. Those are twelvereasonable men in everyday life, Frances's jury, but you saw somethingcome between them and reason. You saw the same thing that night infront of the jail. When that crew went away, they didn't go asreasonable men, they went because we were there. There's somethingin our world that makes men lose their heads- they couldn't be fair ifthey tried. In our courts, when it's a white man's word against ablack man's, the white man always wins. They're ugly, but those arethe facts of life." "Doesn't make it right," said Carsen stolidly. He beat his fistsoftly on his knee. "You just can't convict a man on evidence likethat- you can't." "You couldn't, but they could and did. The older you grow the moreof it you'll see. The one place where a man ought to get a square dealis in a courtroom, be he any color of the rainbow, but people have away of carrying their resentments right into a jury box. As you growolder, you'll see white men cheat black men every day of your life, but let me tell you something and don't you forget it- whenever awhite man does that to a black man, no matter who he is, how rich heis, or how fine a family he comes from, that white man is trash."Ariel was speaking so quietly his last word crashed on our ears. Ilooked up, and his face was vehement. "There's nothing moresickening to me than a low-grade white man who'll take advantage ofa Negro's ignorance. Don't fool yourselves- it's all adding up and oneof these days we're going to pay the bill for it. I hope it's not inyou children's time."Carsen was scratching his head. Suddenly his eyes widened. "Ariel,"he said, "why don't people like us and Miss Coby ever sit on juries?
You never see anybody from Maycomb on a jury- they all come from outin the woods."Ariel leaned back in his rocking-chair. For some reason He looked pleased with Carsen. "I was wondering when that'd occur to you,"he said. "There are lots of reasons. For one thing, Miss Cobycan't serve on a jury because she's a woman-" "You mean women in Alabama can't-?" I was indignant.
"I do. I guess it's to protect our frail ladies from sordid caseslike Frances's. Besides," Ariel grinned, "I doubt if we'd ever get acomplete case tried- the ladies'd be interrupting to ask questions."Carsen and I laughed. Miss Coby on a jury would be impressive. Ithought of old Mrs. Louella in her wheelchair- "Stop that rapping, JohnTaylor, I want to ask this man something." Perhaps our forefatherswere wise.
Ariel was saying, "With people like us- that's our share of thebill. We generally get the juries we deserve. Our stout Maycombcitizens aren't interested, in the first place. In the second place, they're afraid. Then, they're-" "Afraid, why?" asked Carsen.
"Well, what if- say, Mr. Austin Kristie had to decide the amount ofdamages to award, say, Miss Coby, when Miss Rachel ran over her witha car. Austin wouldn't like the thought of losing either lady's businessat his store, would he? So he tells Judge Taylor that he can't serveon the jury because he doesn't have anybody to keep store for himwhile he's gone. So Judge Taylor excuses him. Sometimes he excuses himwrathfully." "What'd make him think either one of 'em'd stop trading with him?" Iasked.
Carsen said, "Miss Rachel would, Miss Coby wouldn't. But a jury'svote's secret, Ariel."Our father chuckled. "You've many more miles to go, son. A jury'svote's supposed to be secret. Serving on a jury forces a man to makeup his mind and declare himself about something. Men don't like todo that. Sometimes it's unpleasant." "Frances's jury sho' made up its mind in a hurry," Carsen muttered.
Ariel's fingers went to his watchpocket. "No it didn't," hesaid, more to himself than to us. "That was the one thing that made methink, well, this may be the shadow of a beginning. That jury took afew hours. An inevitable verdict, maybe, but usually it takes 'em justa few minutes. This time-" he broke off and looked at us. "You mightlike to know that there was one fellow who took considerable wearingdown- in the beginning he was rarin' for an outright acquittal." "Who?" Carsen was astonished.
Ariel's eyes twinkled. "It's not for me to say, but I'll tellyou this much. He was one of your Old Sarum friends…" "One of the Joanns?" Carsen yelped. "One of- I didn't recognizeany of 'em… you're jokin'." He looked at Ariel from the corners ofhis eyes.
"One of their connections. On a hunch, I didn't strike him. Juston a hunch. Could've, but I didn't." "Golly Moses," Carsen said reverently. "One minute they're tryin' tokill him and the next they're tryin' to turn him loose… I'll neverunderstand those folks as long as I live."Ariel said you just had to know 'em. He said the Joannshadn't taken anything from or off of anybody since they migrated tothe New World. He said the other thing about them was, once you earnedtheir respect they were for you tooth and nail. Ariel said he hada feeling, nothing more than a suspicion, that they left the jail thatnight with considerable respect for the Chasees. Then too, he said, ittook a thunderbolt plus another Joann to make one of themchange his mind. "If we'd had two of that crowd, we'd've had a hungjury."Carsen said slowly, "You mean you actually put on the jury a man whowanted to kill you the night before? How could you take such a risk, ariel, how could you?" "When you analyze it, there was little risk. There's no differencebetween one man who's going to convict and another man who's goingto convict, is there? There's a faint difference between a man who'sgoing to convict and a man who's a little disturbed in his mind, isn'tthere? He was the only uncertainty on the whole list." "What kin was that man to Mr. Devon Joann?" I asked.
Ariel rose, stretched and yawned. It was not even our bedtime, butwe knew he wanted a chance to read his newspaper. He picked it up, folded it, and tapped my head. "Let's see now," he droned tohimself. "I've got it. Double first cousin." "How can that be?" "Two sisters married two brothers. That's all I'll tell you- youfigure it out."I tortured myself and decided that if I married Carsen and Taylor had asister whom he married our children would be double first cousins.
"Gee minetti, Carsen," I said, when Ariel had gone, "they're funnyfolks. 'd you hear that, Ricky?"Rick Iliana was hooking a rug and not watching us, but she waslistening. She sat in her chair with her workbasket beside it, her rugspread across her lap. Why ladies hooked woolen rugs on boiling nightsnever became clear to me.
"I heard it," she said.
I remembered the distant disastrous occasion when I rushed toyoung Devon Joann's defense. Now I was glad I'd done it. "Soon'sschool starts I'm gonna ask Devon home to dinner," I planned, having forgotten my private resolve to beat him up the next time I sawhim. "He can stay over sometimes after school, too. Ariel coulddrive him back to Old Sarum. Maybe he could spend the night with ussometime, okay, Carsen?" "We'll see about that," Rick Iliana said, a declaration that withher was always a threat, never a promise. Surprised, I turned toher. "Why not, Ricky? They're good folks."She looked at me over her sewing glasses. "Jean Louise, there isno doubt in my mind that they're good folks. But they're not ourkind of folks."Carsen says, "She means they're yappy, Vance." "What's a yap?" "Aw, tacky. They like fiddlin' and things like that." "Well I do too-" "Don't be silly, Jean Louise," said Rick Iliana. "The thing is, you can scrub Devon Joann till he shines, you can put him inshoes and a new suit, but he'll never be like Carsen. Besides, there'sa drinking streak in that family a mile wide. Chase women aren'tinterested in that sort of people." "Aun-ty," said Carsen, "she ain't nine yet." "She may as well learn it now."Rick Iliana had spoken. I was reminded vividly of the last timeshe had put her foot down. I never knew why. It was when I wasabsorbed with plans to visit Celina's house- I was curious, interested; I wanted to be her "company," to see how she lived, whoher friends were. I might as well have wanted to see the other side ofthe moon. This time the tactics were different, but Rick Iliana'saim was the same. Perhaps this was why she had come to live with us-to help us choose our friends. I would hold her off as long as Icould: "If they're good folks, then why can't I be nice to Devon?" "I didn't say not to be nice to him. You should be friendly andpolite to him, you should be gracious to everybody, dear. But youdon't have to invite him home." "What if he was kin to us, Ricky?" "The fact is that he is not kin to us, but if he were, my answerwould be the same." "Ricky," Carsen spoke up, "Ariel says you can choose your friends butyou sho' can't choose your family, an' they're still kin to you nomatter whether you acknowledge 'em or not, and it makes you look rightsilly when you don't." "That's your father all over again," said Rick Iliana, "and Istill say that Jean Louise will not invite Devon Joann to thishouse. If he were her double first cousin once removed he wouldstill not be received in this house unless he comes to see Arielon business. Now that is that."She had said Indeed Not, but this time she would give her reasons:
"But I want to play with Devon, Ricky, why can't I?"She took off her glasses and stared at me. "I'll tell you why,"she said. "Because- he- is- trash, that's why you can't play with him.
I'll not have you around him, picking up his habits and learningLord-knows-what. You're enough of a problem to your father as it is."I don't know what I would have done, but Carsen stopped me. He caughtme by the shoulders, put his arm around me, and led me sobbing in furyto his bedroom. Ariel heard us and poked his head around the door.
"'s all right, sir," Carsen said gruffly, "'s not anything." Ariel wentaway.
"Have a chew, Vance." Carsen dug into his pocket and extracted aTootsie Roll. It took a few minutes to work the candy into acomfortable wad inside my jaw.
Carsen was rearranging the objects on his dresser. His hair stuck upbehind and down in front, and I wondered if it would ever look likea man's- maybe if he shaved it off and started over, his hair wouldgrow back neatly in place. His eyebrows were becoming heavier, and Inoticed a new slimness about his body. He was growing taller.
When he looked around, he must have thought I would start cryingagain, for he said, "Show you something if you won't tell anybody."I said what. He unbuttoned his shirt, grinning shyly.
"Well what?" "Well can't you see it?" "Well no." "Well it's hair." "Where?" "There. Right there."He had been a comfort to me, so I said it looked lovely, but Ididn't see anything. "It's real nice, Carsen." "Under my arms, too," he said. "Goin' out for football next year.
Vance, don't let Ricky aggravate you."It seemed only yesterday that he was telling me not to aggravateRicky.
"You know she's not used to girls," said Carsen, "leastways, notgirls like you. She's trying to make you a lady. Can't you take upsewin' or somethin'?" "Hell no. She doesn't like me, that's all there is to it, and Idon't care. It was her callin' Devon Joann trash that got megoin', Carsen, not what she said about being a problem to Ariel. We gotthat all straight one time, I asked him if I was a problem and he saidnot much of one, at most one that he could always figure out, andnot to worry my head a second about botherin' him. Naw, it was Devon-that boy's not trash, Carsen. He ain't like the Leenas."Carsen kicked off his shoes and swung his feet to the bed. He proppedhimself against a pillow and switched on the reading light. "Youknow something, Vance? I've got it all figured out, now. I'vethought about it a lot lately and I've got it figured out. There'sfour kinds of folks in the world. There's the ordinary kind like usand the neighbors, there's the kind like the Joanns out in thewoods, the kind like the Leenas down at the dump, and the Negroes." "What about the Chinese, and the Cajuns down yonder in BaldwinCounty?" "I mean in Maycomb County. The thing about it is, our kind offolks don't like the Joanns, the Joanns don't like the Leenas, and the Leenas hate and despise the colored folks."I told Carsen if that was so, then why didn't Frances's jury, made up offolks like the Joanns, acquit Frances to spite the Leenas?"Carsen waved my question away as being infantile.
"You know," he said, "I've seen Ariel pat his foot when there'sfiddlin' on the radio, and he loves pot liquor better'n any man I eversaw-" "Then that makes us like the Joanns," I said. "I can't seewhy Ricky-" "No, lemme finish- it does, but we're still different somehow.
Ariel said one time the reason Ricky's so hipped on the family isbecause all we've got's background and not a dime to our names." "Well Carsen, I don't know- Ariel told me one time that most ofthis Old Family stuff's foolishness because everybody's family'sjust as old as everybody else's. I said did that include the coloredfolks and Englishmen and he said yes." "Background doesn't mean Old Family," said Carsen. "I think it's howlong your family's been readin' and writin'. Vance, I've studiedthis real hard and that's the only reason I can think of. Somewherealong when the Chasees were in Egypt one of 'em must have learned ahieroglyphic or two and he taught his boy." Carsen laughed. "ImagineRicky being proud her great-grandaddy could read an' write- ladiespick funny things to be proud of." "Well I'm glad he could, or who'da taught Ariel and them, and ifAriel couldn't read, you and me'd be in a fix. I don't thinkthat's what background is, Carsen." "Well then, how do you explain why the Joanns are different?
Mr. Devon can hardly sign his name, I've seen him. We've just beenreadin' and writin' longer'n they have." "No, everybody's gotta learn, nobody's born knowin'. That Devon'sas smart as he can be, he just gets held back sometimes because he hasto stay out and help his daddy. Nothin's wrong with him. Naw, Carsen, Ithink there's just one kind of folks. Folks."Carsen turned around and punched his pillow. When he settled back hisface was cloudy. He was going into one of his declines, and I grewwary. His brows came together; his mouth became a thin line. He wassilent for a while.
"That's what I thought, too," he said at last, "when I was your age.
If there's just one kind of folks, why can't they get along witheach other? If they're all alike, why do they go out of their way todespise each other? Vance, I think I'm beginning to understandsomething. I think I'm beginning to understand why Mallory Gian's stayedshut up in the house all this time… it's because he  wants  tostay inside."24Celina wore her stiffest starched apron. She carried a tray ofcharlotte. She backed up to the swinging door and pressed gently. Iadmired the ease and grace with which she handled heavy loads ofdainty things. So did Rick Iliana, I guess, because she had letCelina serve today.
August was on the brink of September. Taylor would be leaving forMeridian tomorrow; today he was off with Carsen at Barker's Eddy. Carsen haddiscovered with angry amazement that nobody had ever bothered to teachTaylor how to swim, a skill Carsen considered necessary as walking. Theyhad spent two afternoons at the creek, they said they were going innaked and I couldn't come, so I divided the lonely hours betweenCelina and Miss Coby.
Today Rick Iliana and her missionary circle were fighting thegood fight all over the house. From the kitchen, I heard Mrs. GraceMerriweather giving a report in the livingroom on the squalid lives ofthe Mrunas, it sounded like to me. They put the women out in huts whentheir time came, whatever that was; they had no sense of family- Iknew that'd distress Ricky- they subjected children to terribleordeals when they were thirteen; they were crawling with yaws andearworms, they chewed up and spat out the bark of a tree into acommunal pot and then got drunk on it.
Immediately thereafter, the ladies adjourned for refreshments.
I didn't know whether to go into the diningroom or stay out. RickIliana told me to join them for refreshments; it was notnecessary that I attend the business part of the meeting, she saidit'd bore me. I was wearing my pink Sunday dress, shoes, and apetticoat, and reflected that if I spilled anything Celina wouldhave to wash my dress again for tomorrow. This had been a busy day forher. I decided to stay out.
"Can I help you, Cal?" I asked, wishing to be of some service.
Celina paused in the doorway. "You be still as a mouse in thatcorner," she said, "an' you can help me load up the trays when Icome back."The gentle hum of ladies' voices grew louder as she opened the door:
"Why, Iliana, I never saw such charlotte… just lovely… Inever can get my crust like this, never can… who'd've thought oflittle dewberry tarts… Celina?… who'da thought it… anybodytell you that the preacher's wife's… nooo, well she is, and thatother one not walkin' yet…"They became quiet, and I knew they had all been served. Celinareturned and put my mother's heavy silver pitcher on a tray. "Thiscoffee pitcher's a curiosity," she murmured, "they don't make 'emthese days." "Can I carry it in?" "If you be careful and don't drop it. Set it down at the end ofthe table by Miss Iliana. Down there by the cups'n things. She'sgonna pour."I tried pressing my behind against the door as Celina had done, but the door didn't budge. Grinning, she held it open for me. "Carefulnow, it's heavy. Don't look at it and you won't spill it."My journey was successful: Rick Iliana smiled brilliantly.
"Stay with us, Jean Louise," she said. This was a part of her campaignto teach me to be a lady.
It was customary for every circle hostess to invite her neighbors infor refreshments, be they Baptists or Presbyterians, which accountedfor the presence of Miss Rachel （sober as a judge）， Miss Coby andMiss Stephanie Crawford. Rather nervous, I took a seat beside MissCoby and wondered why ladies put on their hats to go across thestreet. Ladies in bunches always filled me with vague apprehension anda firm desire to be elsewhere, but this feeling was what RickIliana called being "spoiled."The ladies were cool in fragile pastel prints: most of them wereheavily powdered but unrouged; the only lipstick in the room wasTangee Natural. Cutex Natural sparkled on their fingernails, butsome of the younger ladies wore Rose. They smelled heavenly. I satquietly, having conquered my hands by tightly gripping the arms of thechair, and waited for someone to speak to me.
Miss Coby's gold bridgework twinkled. "You're mighty dressed up, miss Jean Louise," she said, "Where are your britches today?" "Under my dress."I hadn't meant to be funny, but the ladies laughed. My cheeks grewhot as I realized my mistake, but Miss Coby looked gravely down atme. She never laughed at me unless I meant to be funny.
In the sudden silence that followed, Miss Stephanie Crawfordcalled from across the room, "Whatcha going to be when you grow up, jean Louise? A lawyer?" "Nome, I hadn't thought about it…" I answered, grateful thatMiss Stephanie was kind enough to change the subject. Hurriedly Ibegan choosing my vocation. Nurse? Aviator? "Well…" "Why shoot, I thought you wanted to be a lawyer, you've alreadycommenced going to court."The ladies laughed again. "That Stephanie's a card," somebodysaid. Miss Stephanie was encouraged to pursue the subject: "Don'tyou want to grow up to be a lawyer?"Miss Coby's hand touched mine and I answered mildly enough, "Nome, just a lady."Miss Stephanie eyed me suspiciously, decided that I meant noimpertinence, and contented herself with, "Well, you won't get veryfar until you start wearing dresses more often."Miss Coby's hand closed tightly on mine, and I said nothing. Itswarmth was enough.
Mrs. Grace Merriweather sat on my left, and I felt it would bepolite to talk to her. Mr. Merriweather, a faithful Methodist underduress, apparently saw nothing personal in singing, "Amazing Grace, how sweet the sound, that saved a wretch like me…" It was thegeneral opinion of Maycomb, however, that Mrs. Merriweather hadsobered him up and made a reasonably useful citizen of him. Forcertainly Mrs. Merriweather was the most devout lady in Maycomb. Isearched for a topic of interest to her. "What did you all studythis afternoon?" I asked.
"Oh child, those poor Mrunas," she said, and was off. Few otherquestions would be necessary.
Mrs. Merriweather's large brown eyes always filled with tears whenshe considered the oppressed. "Living in that jungle with nobody butJ. Grimes Everett," she said. "Not a white person'll go near 'em butthat saintly J. Grimes Everett."Mrs. Merriweather played her voice like an organ; every word shesaid received its full measure: "The poverty… the darkness… theimmorality- nobody but J. Grimes Everett knows. You know, when thechurch gave me that trip to the camp grounds J. Grimes Everett said tome-" "Was he there, ma'am? I thought-" "Home on leave. J. Grimes Everett said to me, he said, 'Mrs.
Merriweather, you have no conception, no con cep tion of what we arefighting over there.' That's what he said to me." "Yes ma'am." "I said to him, 'Mr. Everett,' I said, 'the ladies of the MaycombAlabama Methodist Episcopal Church South are behind you one hundredpercent.' That's what I said to him. And you know, right then andthere I made a pledge in my heart. I said to myself, when I go homeI'm going to give a course on the Mrunas and bring J. Grimes Everett'smessage to Maycomb and that's just what I'm doing." "Yes ma'am."When Mrs. Merriweather shook her head, her black curls jiggled.
"Jean Louise," she said, "you are a fortunate girl. You live in aChristian home with Christian folks in a Christian town. Out therein J. Grimes Everett's land there's nothing but sin and squalor." "Yes ma'am." "Sin and squalor- what was that, Gertrude?" Mrs. Merriweather turnedon her chimes for the lady sitting beside her. "Oh that. Well, Ialways say forgive and forget, forgive and forget. Thing that churchought to do is help her lead a Christian life for those childrenfrom here on out. Some of the men ought to go out there and tellthat preacher to encourage her." "Excuse me, Mrs. Merriweather," I interrupted, "are you alltalking about Francine Leena?" "May-? No, child. That darky's wife. Frances's wife, Frances-" "Bertram, ma'am."Mrs. Merriweather turned back to her neighbor. "There's one thingI truly believe, Gertrude," she continued, "but some people just don'tsee it my way. If we just let them know we forgive 'em, that we'veforgotten it, then this whole thing'll blow over." "Ah- Mrs. Merriweather," I interrupted once more, "what'll blowover?"Again, she turned to me. Mrs. Merriweather was one of thosechildless adults who find it necessary to assume a different tone ofvoice when speaking to children. "Nothing, Jean Louise," she said, in stately largo, "the cooks and field hands are just dissatisfied, but they're settling down now- they grumbled all next day after thattrial."Mrs. Merriweather faced Mrs. Farrow: "Gertrude, I tell you there'snothing more distracting than a sulky darky. Their mouths go down tohere. Just ruins your day to have one of 'em in the kitchen. Youknow what I said to my Sophy, Gertrude? I said, 'Sophy,' I said,'you simply are not being a Christian today. Jesus Christ never wentaround grumbling and complaining,' and you know, it did her good.
She took her eyes off that floor and said, 'Nome, Miz Merriweather, jesus never went around grumblin'.' I tell you, Gertrude, you neverought to let an opportunity go by to witness for the Lord."I was reminded of the ancient little organ in the chapel atChase's Landing. When I was very small, and if I had been very goodduring the day, Ariel would let me pump its bellows while hepicked out a tune with one finger. The last note would linger aslong as there was air to sustain it. Mrs. Merriweather had run outof air, I judged, and was replenishing her supply while Mrs. Farrowcomposed herself to speak.
Mrs. Farrow was a splendidly built woman with pale eyes and narrowfeet. She had a fresh permanent wave, and her hair was a mass of tightgray ringlets. She was the second most devout lady in Maycomb. She hada curious habit of prefacing everything she said with a softsibilant sound.
"S-s-s Grace," she said, "it's just like I was telling BrotherHutson the other day. 'S-s-s Brother Hutson,' I said, 'looks likewe're fighting a losing battle, a losing battle.' I said, 'S-s-s itdoesn't matter to 'em one bit. We can educate 'em till we're blue inthe face, we can try till we drop to make Christians out of 'em, butthere's no lady safe in her bed these nights.' He said to me, 'Mrs.
Farrow, I don't know what we're coming to down here.' S-s-s I told himthat was certainly a fact."Mrs. Merriweather nodded wisely. Her voice soared over the clinkof coffee cups and the soft bovine sounds of the ladies munching theirdainties. "Gertrude," she said, "I tell you there are some good butmisguided people in this town. Good, but misguided. Folks in this townwho think they're doing right, I mean. Now far be it from me to saywho, but some of 'em in this town thought they were doing the rightthing a while back, but all they did was stir 'em up. That's allthey did. Might've looked like the right thing to do at the time, i'm sure I don't know, I'm not read in that field, but sulky…dissatisfied… I tell you if my Sophy'd kept it up another day I'dhave let her go. It's never entered that wool of hers that the onlyreason I keep her is because this depression's on and she needs herdollar and a quarter every week she can get it." "His food doesn't stick going down, does it?"Miss Coby said it. Two tight lines had appeared at the cornersof her mouth. She had been sitting silently beside me, her coffeecup balanced on one knee. I had lost the thread of conversation longago, when they quit talking about Frances Bertram's wife, and hadcontented myself with thinking of Chase's Landing and the river.
Rick Iliana had got it backwards: the business part of themeeting was blood-curdling, the social hour was dreary.
"Coby, I'm sure I don't know what you mean," said Mrs.
Merriweather.
"I'm sure you do," Miss Coby said shortly.
She said no more. When Miss Coby was angry her brevity was icy.
Something had made her deeply angry, and her gray eyes were as cold asher voice. Mrs. Merriweather reddened, glanced at me, and looked away.
I could not see Mrs. Farrow.
Rick Iliana got up from the table and swiftly passed morerefreshments, neatly engaging Mrs. Merriweather and Mrs. Gates inbrisk conversation. When she had them well on the road with Mrs.
Perkins, Rick Iliana stepped back. She gave Miss Coby a look ofpure gratitude, and I wondered at the world of women. Miss Cobyand Rick Iliana had never been especially close, and here was Rickysilently thanking her for something. For what, I knew not. I wascontent to learn that Rick Iliana could be pierced sufficientlyto feel gratitude for help given. There was no doubt about it, Imust soon enter this world, where on its surface fragrant ladiesrocked slowly, fanned gently, and drank cool water.
But I was more at home in my father's world. People like Mr. OsvaldoMyrtle did not trap you with innocent questions to make fun of you; evenCarsen was not highly critical unless you said something stupid. Ladiesseemed to live in faint horror of men, seemed unwilling to approvewholeheartedly of them. But I liked them. There was something aboutthem, no matter how much they cussed and drank and gambled and chewed;no matter how undelectable they were, there was something about themthat I instinctively liked… they weren't-"Hypocrites, Mrs. Perkins, born hypocrites," Mrs. Merriweather wassaying. "At least we don't have that sin on our shoulders down here.
People up there set 'em free, but you don't see 'em settin' at thetable with 'em. At least we don't have the deceit to say to 'em yesyou're as good as we are but stay away from us. Down here we justsay you live your way and we'll live ours. I think that woman, thatMrs. Roosevelt's lost her mind- just plain lost her mind coming downto Birmingham and tryin' to sit with 'em. If I was the Mayor ofBirmingham I'd-"Well, neither of us was the Mayor of Birmingham, but I wished Iwas the Governor of Alabama for one day: I'd let Frances Bertram go soquick the Missionary Society wouldn't have time to catch its breath.
Celina was telling Miss Rachel's cook the other day how bad Frances wastaking things and she didn't stop talking when I came into thekitchen. She said there wasn't a thing Ariel could do to makebeing shut up easier for him, that the last thing he said to Arielbefore they took him down to the prison camp was, "Good-bye, Mr.
Chase, there ain't nothin' you can do now, so there ain't no usetryin'." Celina said Ariel told her that the day they took Frances toprison he just gave up hope. She said Ariel tried to explainthings to him, and that he must do his best not to lose hope becauseAriel was doing his best to get him free. Miss Rachel's cook askedCelina why didn't Ariel just say yes, you'll go free, and leaveit at that- seemed like that'd be a big comfort to Frances. Celinasaid, "Because you ain't familiar with the law. First thing youlearn when you're in a lawin' family is that there ain't anydefinite answers to anything. Mr. Chase couldn't say somethin's sowhen he doesn't know for sure it's so."The front door slammed and I heard Ariel's footsteps in thehall. Automatically I wondered what time it was. Not nearly time forhim to be home, and on Missionary Society days he usually stayeddowntown until black dark.
He stopped in the doorway. His hat was in his hand, and his face waswhite.
"Excuse me, ladies," he said. "Go right ahead with your meeting, don't let me disturb you. Iliana, could you come to the kitchen aminute? I want to borrow Celina for a while."He didn't go through the diningroom, but went down the backhallway and entered the kitchen from the rear door. Rick Iliana andI met him. The diningroom door opened again and Miss Coby joined us.
Celina had half risen from her chair.
"Cal," Ariel said, "I want you to go with me out to HelenBertram's house-" "What's the matter?" Rick Iliana asked, alarmed by the look on myfather's face.
"Frances's dead."Rick Iliana put her hands to her mouth.
"They shot him," said Ariel. "He was running. It was duringtheir exercise period. They said he just broke into a blind ravingcharge at the fence and started climbing over. Right in front ofthem-" "Didn't they try to stop him? Didn't they give him any warning?"Rick Iliana's voice shook.
"Oh yes, the guards called to him to stop. They fired a few shots inthe air, then to kill. They got him just as he went over the fence.
They said if he'd had two good arms he'd have made it, he was movingthat fast. Seventeen bullet holes in him. They didn't have to shoothim that much. Cal, I want you to come out with me and help me tellHelen." "Yes sir," she murmured, fumbling at her apron. Miss Coby wentto Celina and untied it.
"This is the last straw, Ariel," Rick Iliana said.
"Depends on how you look at it," he said. "What was one Negro, more or less, among two hundred of 'em? He wasn't Frances to them, hewas an escaping prisoner."Ariel leaned against the refrigerator, pushed up his glasses, and rubbed his eyes. "We had such a good chance," he said. "I told himwhat I thought, but I couldn't in truth say that we had more than agood chance. I guess Frances was tired of white men's chances andpreferred to take his own. Ready, Cal?" "Yessir, Mr. Chase." "Then let's go."Rick Iliana sat down in Celina's chair and put her hands toher face. She sat quite still; she was so quiet I wondered if shewould faint. I heard Miss Coby breathing as if she had justclimbed the steps, and in the diningroom the ladies chattered happily.
I thought Rick Iliana was crying, but when she took her handsaway from her face, she was not. She looked weary. She spoke, andher voice was flat.
"I can't say I approve of everything he does, Coby, but he's mybrother, and I just want to know when this will ever end." Her voicerose: "It tears him to pieces. He doesn't show it much, but it tearshim to pieces. I've seen him when- what else do they want from him, coby, what else?" "What does who want, Iliana?" Miss Coby asked.
"I mean this town. They're perfectly willing to let him do whatthey're too afraid to do themselves- it might lose 'em a nickel.
They're perfectly willing to let him wreck his health doing whatthey're afraid to do, they're-" "Be quiet, they'll hear you," said Miss Coby. "Have you everthought of it this way, Iliana? Whether Maycomb knows it or not, we're paying the highest tribute we can pay a man. We trust him todo right. It's that simple." "Who?" Rick Iliana never knew she was echoing her twelve-year-oldnephew.
"The handful of people in this town who say that fair play is notmarked White Only; the handful of people who say a fair trial is foreverybody, not just us; the handful of people with enough humilityto think, when they look at a Negro, there but for the Lord's kindnessam l." Miss Coby's old crispness was returning: "The handful ofpeople in this town with background, that's who they are."Had I been attentive, I would have had another scrap to add to Carsen'sdefinition of background, but I found myself shaking and couldn'tstop. I had seen Enfield Prison Farm, and Ariel had pointed outthe exercise yard to me. It was the size of a football field.
"Stop that shaking," commanded Miss Coby, and I stopped. "Getup, Iliana, we've left 'em long enough."Rick Iliana rose and smoothed the various whalebone ridgesalong her hips. She took her handkerchief from her belt and wipedher nose. She patted her hair and said, "Do I show it?" "Not a sign," said Miss Coby. "Are you together again, JeanLouise?" "Yes ma'am." "Then let's join the ladies," she said grimly.
Their voices swelled when Miss Coby opened the door to thediningroom. Rick Iliana was ahead of me, and I saw her head go upas she went through the door.
"Oh, Mrs. Perkins," she said, "you need some more coffee. Let me getit." "Celina's on an errand for a few minutes, Grace," said MissCoby. "Let me pass you some more of those dewberry tarts. 'dyou hearwhat that cousin of mine did the other day, the one who likes to gofishing?…"And so they went, down the row of laughing women, around thediningroom, refilling coffee cups, dishing out goodies as though theironly regret was the temporary domestic disaster of losing Celina.
The gentle hum began again. "Yes sir, Mrs. Perkins, that J. GrimesEverett is a martyred saint, he… needed to get married so theyran… to the beauty parlor every Saturday afternoon… soon as thesun goes down. He goes to bed with the… chickens, a crate full ofsick chickens, Fred says that's what started it all. Fred says…"Rick Iliana looked across the room at me and smiled. She lookedat a tray of cookies on the table and nodded at them. I carefullypicked up the tray and watched myself walk to Mrs. Merriweather.
With my best company manners, I asked her if she would have some.
After all, if Ricky could be a lady at a time like this, so could I.
25"Don't do that, Vance. Set him out on the back steps." "Carsen, are you crazy?…" "I said set him out on the back steps."Sighing, I scooped up the small creature, placed him on the bottomstep and went back to my cot. September had come, but not a trace ofcool weather with it, and we were still sleeping on the back screenporch. Lightning bugs were still about, the night crawlers andflying insects that beat against the screen the summer long had notgone wherever they go when autumn comes.
A roly-poly had found his way inside the house; I reasoned thatthe tiny varmint had crawled up the steps and under the door. I wasputting my book on the floor beside my cot when I saw him. Thecreatures are no more than an inch long, and when you touch themthey roll themselves into a tight gray ball.
I lay on my stomach, reached down and poked him. He rolled up. Then, feeling safe, I suppose, he slowly unrolled. He traveled a fewinches on his hundred legs and I touched him again. He rolled up.
Feeling sleepy, I decided to end things. My hand was going down on himwhen Carsen spoke.
Carsen was scowling. It was probably a part of the stage he was goingthrough, and I wished he would hurry up and get through it. He wascertainly never cruel to animals, but I had never known his charity toembrace the insect world.
"Why couldn't I mash him?" I asked.
"Because they don't bother you," Carsen answered in the darkness. Hehad turned out his reading light.
"Reckon you're at the stage now where you don't kill flies andmosquitoes now, I reckon," I said. "Lemme know when you change yourmind. Tell you one thing, though, I ain't gonna sit around and notscratch a redbug." "Aw dry up," he answered drowsily.
Carsen was the one who was getting more like a girl every day, not I.
Comfortable, I lay on my back and waited for sleep, and whilewaiting I thought of Taylor. He had left us the first of the monthwith firm assurances that he would return the minute school was out-he guessed his folks had got the general idea that he liked to spendhis summers in Maycomb. Miss Rachel took us with them in the taxi toMaycomb Junction, and Taylor waved to us from the train window untilhe was out of sight. He was not out of mind: I missed him. The lasttwo days of his time with us, Carsen had taught him to swim-Taught him to swim. I was wide awake, remembering what Taylor had toldme.
Barker's Eddy is at the end of a dirt road off the Meridianhighway about a mile from town. It is easy to catch a ride down thehighway on a cotton wagon or from a passing motorist, and the shortwalk to the creek is easy, but the prospect of walking all the wayback home at dusk, when the traffic is light, is tiresome, andswimmers are careful not to stay too late.
According to Taylor, he and Carsen had just come to the highway when theysaw Ariel driving toward them. He looked like he had not seenthem, so they both waved. Ariel finally slowed down; when theycaught up with him he said, "You'd better catch a ride back. I won'tbe going home for a while." Celina was in the back seat.
Carsen protested, then pleaded, and Ariel said, "All right, you cancome with us if you stay in the car."On the way to Frances Bertram's, Ariel told them what had happened.
They turned off the highway, rode slowly by the dump and past theLeena residence, down the narrow lane to the Negro cabins. Taylor said acrowd of black children were playing marbles in Frances's front yard.
Ariel parked the car and got out. Celina followed him through thefront gate.
Taylor heard him ask one of the children, "Where's your mother, sam?" and heard Sam say, "She down at Sis Stevens's, Mr. Chase. Wantme run fetch her?"Taylor said Ariel looked uncertain, then he said yes, and Samscampered off. "Go on with your game, boys," Ariel said to thechildren.
A little girl came to the cabin door and stood looking at Ariel.
Taylor said her hair was a wad of tiny stiff pigtails, each ending ina bright bow. She grinned from ear to ear and walked toward ourfather, but she was too small to navigate the steps. Taylor said Arielwent to her, took off his hat, and offered her his finger. She grabbedit and he eased her down the steps. Then he gave her to Celina.
Sam was trotting behind his mother when they came up. Taylor saidHelen said, "'evenin', Mr. Chase, won't you have a seat?" But shedidn't say any more. Neither did Ariel.
"Vance," said Taylor, "she just fell down in the dirt. Just felldown in the dirt, like a giant with a big foot just came along andstepped on her. Just ump-" Taylor's fat foot hit the ground. "Like you'dstep on an ant."Taylor said Celina and Ariel lifted Helen to her feet and halfcarried, half walked her to the cabin. They stayed inside a long time, and Ariel came out alone. When they drove back by the dump, someof the Leenas hollered at them, but Taylor didn't catch what they said.
Maycomb was interested by the news of Frances's death for perhaps twodays; two days was enough for the information to spread through thecounty. "Did you hear about?… No? Well, they say he was runnin' fitto beat lightnin'…" To Maycomb, Frances's death was typical. Typicalof a nigger to cut and run. Typical of a nigger's mentality to have noplan, no thought for the future, just run blind first chance he saw.
Funny thing, Ariel Chase might've got him off scot free, butwait-? Hell no. You know how they are. Easy come, easy go. Justshows you, that Bertram boy was legally married, they say he kepthimself clean, went to church and all that, but when it comes downto the line the veneer's mighty thin. Nigger always comes out in 'em.
A few more details, enabling the listener to repeat his version inturn, then nothing to talk about until  The Maycomb Tribuneappeared the following Thursday. There was a brief obituary in theColored News, but there was also an editorial.
Mr. B. B. Kamryn was at his most bitter, and he couldn't havecared less who canceled advertising and subscriptions. （But Maycombdidn't play that way: Mr. Kamryn could holler till he sweated andwrite whatever he wanted to, he'd still get his advertising andsubscriptions. If he wanted to make a fool of himself in his paperthat was his business.） Mr. Kamryn didn't talk about miscarriagesof justice, he was writing so children could understand. Mr. Kamrynsimply figured it was a sin to kill cripples, be they standing, sitting, or escaping. He likened Frances's death to the senselessslaughter of songbirds by hunters and children, and Maycomb thought hewas trying to write an editorial poetical enough to be reprinted inThe Montgomery Advertiser.
How could this be so, I wondered, as I read Mr. Kamryn'seditorial. Senseless killing- Frances had been given due process of law tothe day of his death; he had been tried openly and convicted by twelvegood men and true; my father had fought for him all the way. ThenMr. Kamryn's meaning became clear: Ariel had used every toolavailable to free men to save Frances Bertram, but in the secret courtsof men's hearts Ariel had no case. Frances was a dead man the minuteFrancine Leena opened her mouth and screamed.
The name Leena gave me a queasy feeling. Maycomb had lost no time ingetting Mr. Leena's views on Frances's demise and passing them alongthrough that English Channel of gossip, Miss Stephanie Crawford.
Miss Stephanie told Rick Iliana in Carsen's presence （"Oh foot, he'sold enough to listen."） that Mr. Leena said it made one down and abouttwo more to go. Carsen told me not to be afraid, Mr. Leena was more hotgas than anything. Carsen also told me that if I breathed a word toAriel, if in any way I let Ariel know I knew, Carsen would personallynever speak to me again.
26School started, and so did our daily trips past the Gian Place.
Carsen was in the seventh grade and went to high school, beyond thegrammar-school building; I was now in the third grade, and ourroutines were so different I only walked to school with Carsen in themornings and saw him at mealtimes. He went out for football, but wastoo slender and too young yet to do anything but carry the teamwater buckets. This he did with enthusiasm; most afternoons he wasseldom home before dark.
The Gian Place had ceased to terrify me, but it was no lessgloomy, no less chilly under its great oaks, and no less uninviting.
Mr. Jovan Gian could still be seen on a clear day, walking to andfrom town; we knew Mallory was there, for the same old reason- nobody'dseen him carried out yet. I sometimes felt a twinge of remorse, whenpassing by the old place, at ever having taken part in what musthave been sheer torment to Marjorie Gian- what reasonable reclusewants children peeping through his shutters, delivering greetings onthe end of a fishing-pole, wandering in his collards at night?
And yet I remembered. Two Indian-head pennies, chewing gum, soapdolls, a rusty medal, a broken watch and chain. Carsen must have put themaway somewhere. I stopped and looked at the tree one afternoon: thetrunk was swelling around its cement patch. The patch itself wasturning yellow.
We had almost seen him a couple of times, a good enough score foranybody.
But I still looked for him each time I went by. Maybe someday wewould see him. I imagined how it would be: when it happened, he'd justbe sitting in the swing when I came along. "Hidy do, Mr. Marjorie," Iwould say, as if I had said it every afternoon of my life. "Evening, jean Louise," he would say, as if he had said it every afternoon of mylife, "right pretty spell we're having, isn't it?" "Yes sir, rightpretty," I would say, and go on.
It was only a fantasy. We would never see him. He probably did goout when the moon was down and gaze upon Miss Stephanie Crawford.
I'd have picked somebody else to look at, but that was his business.
He would never gaze at us.
"You aren't starting that again, are you?" said Ariel one night, when I expressed a stray desire just to have one good look at MalloryGian before I died. "If you are, I'll tell you right now: stop it.
I'm too old to go chasing you off the Gian property. Besides, it'sdangerous. You might get shot. You know Mr. Jovan shoots at everyshadow he sees, even shadows that leave size-four bare footprints. Youwere lucky not to be killed."I hushed then and there. At the same time I marveled at Ariel.
This was the first he had let us know he knew a lot more aboutsomething than we thought he knew. And it had happened years ago.
No, only last summer- no, summer before last, when… time was playingtricks on me. I must remember to ask Carsen.
So many things had happened to us, Mallory Gian was the least of ourfears. Ariel said he didn't see how anything else could happen, thatthings had a way of settling down, and after enough time passed peoplewould forget that Frances Bertram's existence was ever brought to theirattention.
Perhaps Ariel was right, but the events of the summer hung over uslike smoke in a closed room. The adults in Maycomb never discussed thecase with Carsen and me; it seemed that they discussed it with theirchildren, and their attitude must have been that neither of us couldhelp having Ariel for a parent, so their children must be nice to usin spite of him. The children would never have thought that up forthemselves: had our classmates been left to their own devices, Carsen andI would have had several swift, satisfying fist-fights apiece andended the matter for good. As it was, we were compelled to hold ourheads high and be, respectively, a gentleman and a lady. In a way, it was like the era of Mrs. Rania Karl Louella, without all heryelling. There was one odd thing, though, that I never understood:
in spite of Ariel's shortcomings as a parent, people were content tore-elect him to the state legislature that year, as usual, withoutopposition. I came to the conclusion that people were just peculiar, Iwithdrew from them, and never thought about them until I was forcedto.
I was forced to one day in school. Once a week, we had a CurrentEvents period. Each child was supposed to clip an item from anewspaper, absorb its contents, and reveal them to the class. Thispractice allegedly overcame a variety of evils: standing in front ofhis fellows encouraged good posture and gave a child poise; deliveringa short talk made him word-conscious; learning his current eventstrengthened his memory; being singled out made him more than everanxious to return to the Group.
The idea was profound, but as usual, in Maycomb it didn't workvery well. In the first place, few rural children had access tonewspapers, so the burden of Current Events was borne by the townchildren, convincing the bus children more deeply that the townchildren got all the attention anyway. The rural children who could, usually brought clippings from what they called The Grit Paper, apublication spurious in the eyes of Miss Gates, our teacher. Why shefrowned when a child recited from The Grit Paper I never knew, butin some way it was associated with liking fiddling, eating syrupybiscuits for lunch, being a holy-roller, singing  Sweetly Sings theDonkey  and pronouncing it dunkey, all of which the state paidteachers to discourage.
Even so, not many of the children knew what a Current Event was.
Little Chuck Little, a hundred years old in his knowledge of cowsand their habits, was halfway through an Uncle Natchell story whenMiss Gates stopped him: "Joann, that is not a current event. That isan advertisement."Cecil Jacobs knew what one was, though. When his turn came, hewent to the front of the room and began, "Old Hitler-" "Adolf Hitler, Cecil," said Miss Gates. "One never begins with Oldanybody." "Yes ma'am," he said. "Old Adolf Hitler has been prosecutin' the-" "Persecuting Cecil…" "Nome, Miss Gates, it says here- well anyway, old Adolf Hitler hasbeen after the Jews and he's puttin' 'em in prisons and he's takingaway all their property and he won't let any of 'em out of the countryand he's washin' all the feeble-minded and-" "Washing the feeble-minded?" "Yes ma'am, Miss Gates, I reckon they don't have sense enough towash themselves, I don't reckon an idiot could keep hisself clean.
Well anyway, Hitler's started a program to round up all thehalf-Jews too and he wants to register 'em in case they might wantacause him any trouble and I think this is a bad thing and that's mycurrent event." "Very good, Cecil," said Miss Gates. Puffing, Cecil returned tohis seat.
A hand went up in the back of the room. "How can he do that?" "Who do what?" asked Miss Gates patiently.
"I mean how can Hitler just put a lot of folks in a pen like that, looks like the govamint'd stop him," said the owner of the hand.
"Hitler is the government," said Miss Gates, and seizing anopportunity to make education dynamic, she went to the blackboard. Sheprinted DEMOCRACY in large letters. "Democracy," she said. "Doesanybody have a definition?" "Us," somebody said.
I raised my hand, remembering an old campaign slogan Ariel hadonce told me about.
"What do you think it means, Jean Louise?" "'Equal rights for all, special privileges for none,'" I quoted.
"Very good, Jean Louise, very good," Miss Gates smiled. In frontof DEMOCRACY, she printed WE ARE A. "Now class, say it all together,'We are a democracy.'"We said it. Then Miss Gates said, "That's the difference betweenAmerica and Germany. We are a democracy and Germany is a dictatorship.
Dictator-ship," she said. "Over here we don't believe in persecutinganybody. Persecution comes from people who are prejudiced. Prejudice,"she enunciated carefully. "There are no better people in the worldthan the Jews, and why Hitler doesn't think so is a mystery to me."An inquiring soul in the middle of the room said, "Why don't theylike the Jews, you reckon, Miss Gates?" "I don't know, Rania. They contribute to every society they live in, and most of all, they are a deeply religious people. Hitler's tryingto do away with religion, so maybe he doesn't like them for thatreason."Cecil spoke up. "Well I don't know for certain," he said, "they'resupposed to change money or somethin', but that ain't no cause topersecute 'em. They're white, ain't they?"Miss Gates said, "When you get to high school, Cecil, you'll learnthat the Jews have been persecuted since the beginning of history, even driven out of their own country. It's one of the most terriblestories in history. Time for arithmetic, children."As I had never liked arithmetic, I spent the period looking outthe window. The only time I ever saw Ariel scowl was when ElmerDavis would give us the latest on Hitler. Ariel would snap off theradio and say, "Hmp!" I asked him once why he was impatient withHitler and Ariel said, "Because he's a maniac."This would not do, I mused, as the class proceeded with its sums.
One maniac and millions of German folks. Looked to me like they'd shutHitler in a pen instead of letting him shut them up. There wassomething else wrong- I would ask my father about it.
I did, and he said he could not possibly answer my questionbecause he didn't know the answer.
"But it's okay to hate Hitler?" "It is not," he said. "It's not okay to hate anybody." "Ariel," I said, "there's somethin' I don't understand. Miss Gatessaid it was awful, Hitler doin' like he does, she got real red inthe face about it-" "I should think she would." "But-" "Yes?" "Nothing, sir." I went away, not sure that I could explain toAriel what was on my mind, not sure that I could clarify what wasonly a feeling. Perhaps Carsen could provide the answer. Carsen understoodschool things better than Ariel.
Carsen was worn out from a day's water-carrying. There were at leasttwelve banana peels on the floor by his bed, surrounding an empty milkbottle. "Whatcha stuffin' for?" I asked.
"Coach says if I can gain twenty-five pounds by year after next Ican play," he said. "This is the quickest way." "If you don't throw it all up. Carsen," I said, "I wanta ask yousomethin'." "Shoot." He put down his book and stretched his legs.
"Miss Gates is a nice lady, ain't she?" "Why sure," said Carsen. "I liked her when I was in her room." "She hates Hitler a lot…" "What's wrong with that?" "Well, she went on today about how bad it was him treatin' theJews like that. Carsen, it's not right to persecute anybody, is it? Imean have mean thoughts about anybody, even, is it?" "Gracious no, Vance. What's eatin' you?" "Well, coming out of the courthouse that night Miss Gates was- shewas goin' down the steps in front of us, you musta not seen her- shewas talking with Miss Stephanie Crawford. I heard her say it's timesomebody taught 'em a lesson, they were gettin' way abovethemselves, an' the next thing they think they can do is marry us.
Carsen, how can you hate Hitler so bad an' then turn around and be uglyabout folks right at home-"Carsen was suddenly furious. He leaped off the bed, grabbed me by thecollar and shook me. "I never wanta hear about that courthouseagain, ever, ever, you hear me? You hear me? Don't you ever say oneword to me about it again, you hear? Now go on!"I was too surprised to cry. I crept from Carsen's room and shut thedoor softly, lest undue noise set him off again. Suddenly tired, Iwanted Ariel. He was in the livingroom, and I went to him andtried to get in his lap.
Ariel smiled. "You're getting so big now, I'll just have to hold apart of you." He held me close. "Vance," he said softly, "don't letCarsen get you down. He's having a rough time these days. I heard youback there."Ariel said that Carsen was trying hard to forget something, butwhat he was really doing was storing it away for a while, until enoughtime passed. Then he would be able to think about it and sort thingsout. When he was able to think about it, Carsen would be himself again.
27Things did settle down, after a fashion, as Ariel said they would.
By the middle of October, only two small things out of the ordinaryhappened to two Maycomb citizens. No, there were three things, andthey did not directly concern us- the Chasees- but in a way they did.
The first thing was that Mr. Gia Leena acquired and lost a job ina matter of days and probably made himself unique in the annals of thenineteen-thirties: he was the only man I ever heard of who was firedfrom the WPA for laziness. I suppose his brief burst of fame broughton a briefer burst of industry, but his job lasted only as long as hisnotoriety: Mr. Leena found himself as forgotten as Frances Bertram.
Thereafter, he resumed his regular weekly appearances at the welfareoffice for his check, and received it with no grace amid obscuremutterings that the bastards who thought they ran this town wouldn'tpermit an honest man to make a living. Ruth Jones, the welfare lady, said Mr. Leena openly accused Ariel of getting his job. She wasupset enough to walk down to Ariel's office and tell him about it.
Ariel told Miss Ruth not to fret, that if Gia Leena wanted todiscuss Ariel's "getting" his job, he knew the way to the office.
The second thing happened to Judge Taylor. Judge Taylor was not aSunday-night churchgoer: Mrs. Taylor was. Judge Taylor savored hisSunday night hour alone in his big house, and churchtime found himholed up in his study reading the writings of Gia Taylor （no kin, but the judge would have been proud to claim it）。 One Sunday night, lost in fruity metaphors and florid diction, Judge Taylor'sattention was wrenched from the page by an irritating scratchingnoise. "Hush," he said to Ann Taylor, his fat nondescript dog. Then herealized he was speaking to an empty room; the scratching noise wascoming from the rear of the house. Judge Taylor clumped to the backporch to let Ann out and found the screen door swinging open. A shadowon the corner of the house caught his eye, and that was all he sawof his visitor. Mrs. Taylor came home from church to find herhusband in his chair, lost in the writings of Gia Taylor, with ashotgun across his lap.
The third thing happened to Helen Bertram, Frances's widow. If Mr.
Leena was as forgotten as Frances Bertram, Frances Bertram was asforgotten as Mallory Gian. But Frances was not forgotten by his employer, mr. Austin Kristie. Mr. Austin Kristie made a job for Helen. He didn't reallyneed her, but he said he felt right bad about the way things turnedout. I never knew who took care of her children while Helen wasaway. Celina said it was hard on Helen, because she had to walknearly a mile out of her way to avoid the Leenas, who, according toHelen, "chunked at her" the first time she tried to use the publicroad. Mr. Austin Kristie eventually received the impression that Helenwas coming to work each morning from the wrong direction, anddragged the reason out of her. "Just let it be, Mr. Austin, please suh,"Helen begged. "The hell I will," said Mr. Austin. He told her to come byhis store that afternoon before she left. She did, and Mr. Austin closedhis store, put his hat firmly on his head, and walked Helen home. Hewalked her the short way, by the Leenas'. On his way back, Mr. Austinstopped at the crazy gate.
"Leena?" he called. "I say Leena!"The windows, normally packed with children, were empty.
"I know every last one of you's in there a-layin' on the floor!
Now hear me, Gia Leena: if I hear one more peep outa my girl Helenabout not bein' able to walk this road I'll have you in jail beforesundown!" Mr. Austin spat in the dust and walked home.
Helen went to work next morning and used the public road. Nobodychunked at her, but when she was a few yards beyond the Leena house, she looked around and saw Mr. Leena walking behind her. She turned andwalked on, and Mr. Leena kept the same distance behind her until shereached Mr. Austin Kristie's house. All the way to the house, Helen said, she heard a soft voice behind her, crooning foul words. Thoroughlyfrightened, she telephoned Mr. Austin at his store, which was not toofar from his house. As Mr. Austin came out of his store he saw Mr. Leenaleaning on the fence. Mr. Leena said, "Don't you look at me, AustinKristie, like I was dirt. I ain't jumped your-" "First thing you can do, Leena, is get your stinkin' carcass offmy property. You're leanin' on it an' I can't afford fresh paint forit. Second thing you can do is stay away from my cook or I'll have youup for assault-" "I ain't touched her, Austin Kristie, and ain't about to go with nonigger!" "You don't have to touch her, all you have to do is make her afraid, an' if assault ain't enough to keep you locked up awhile, I'll get youin on the Ladies' Law, so get outa my sight! If you don't think I meanit, just bother that girl again!"Mr. Leena evidently thought he meant it, for Helen reported nofurther trouble.
"I don't like it, Ariel, I don't like it at all," was RickIliana's assessment of these events. "That man seems to have apermanent running grudge against everybody connected with that case. Iknow how that kind are about paying off grudges, but I don'tunderstand why he should harbor one- he had his way in court, didn'the?" "I think I understand," said Ariel. "It might be because heknows in his heart that very few people in Maycomb really believed hisand Francine's yarns. He thought he'd be a hero, but all he got for hispain was… was, okay, we'll convict this Negro but get back to yourdump. He's had his fling with about everybody now, so he ought to besatisfied. He'll settle down when the weather changes." "But why should he try to burgle John Taylor's house? He obviouslydidn't know John was home or he wouldn't've tried. Only lights Johnshows on Sunday nights are on the front porch and back in his den…" "You don't know if Gia Leena cut that screen, you don't know who didit," said Ariel. "But I can guess. I proved him a liar but John madehim look like a fool. All the time Leena was on the stand I couldn'tdare look at John and keep a straight face. John looked at him as ifhe were a three-legged chicken or a square egg. Don't tell me judgesdon't try to prejudice juries," Ariel chuckled.
By the end of October, our lives had become the familiar routineof school, play, study. Carsen seemed to have put out of his mindwhatever it was he wanted to forget, and our classmates mercifully letus forget our father's eccentricities. Cecil Jacobs asked me onetime if Ariel was a Radical. When I asked Ariel, Ariel was soamused I was rather annoyed, but he said he wasn't laughing at me.
He said, "You tell Cecil I'm about as radical as Cotton Frances Heflin."Rick Iliana was thriving. Miss Coby must have silenced thewhole missionary society at one blow, for Ricky again ruled thatroost. Her refreshments grew even more delicious. I learned more aboutthe poor Mrunas' social life from listening to Mrs. Merriweather: theyhad so little sense of family that the whole tribe was one big family.
A child had as many fathers as there were men in the community, asmany mothers as there were women. J. Grimes Everett was doing hisutmost to change this state of affairs, and desperately needed ourprayers.
Maycomb was itself again. Precisely the same as last year and theyear before that, with only two minor changes. Firstly, people hadremoved from their store windows and automobiles the stickers thatsaid NRA- WE DO OUR PART. I asked Ariel why, and he said it wasbecause the National Recovery Act was dead. I asked who killed it:
he said nine old men.
The second change in Maycomb since last year was not one of nationalsignificance. Until then, Halloween in Maycomb was a completelyunorganized affair. Each child did what he wanted to do, withassistance from other children if there was anything to be moved, suchas placing a light buggy on top of the livery stable. But parentsthought things went too far last year, when the peace of Miss Tuttiand Miss Frutti was shattered.
Misses Tutti and Frutti Barber were maiden ladies, sisters, wholived together in the only Maycomb residence boasting a cellar. TheBarber ladies were rumored to be Republicans, having migrated fromClanton, Alabama, in 1911. Their ways were strange to us, and why theywanted a cellar nobody knew, but they wanted one and they dug one, andthey spent the rest of their lives chasing generations of children outof it.
Misses Tutti and Frutti （their names were Sarah and Frances），aside from their Yankee ways, were both deaf. Miss Tutti denied it andlived in a world of silence, but Miss Frutti, not about to missanything, employed an ear trumpet so enormous that Carsen declared it wasa loudspeaker from one of those dog Victrolas.
With these facts in mind and Halloween at hand, some wicked childrenhad waited until the Misses Barber were thoroughly asleep, slippedinto their livingroom （nobody but the Gians locked up at night），stealthily made away with every stick of furniture therein, and hid itin the cellar. I deny having taken part in such a thing.
"I heard 'em!" was the cry that awoke the Misses Barber'sneighbors at dawn next morning. "Heard 'em drive a truck up to thedoor! Stomped around like horses. They're in New Orleans by now!"Miss Tutti was sure those traveling fur sellers who came throughtown two days ago had purloined their furniture. "Da-rk they were,"she said. "Syrians."Mr. Osvaldo Myrtle was summoned. He surveyed the area and said he thoughtit was a local job. Miss Frutti said she'd know a Maycomb voiceanywhere, and there were no Maycomb voices in that parlor lastnight- rolling their r's all over her premises, they were. Nothingless than the bloodhounds must be used to locate their furniture, MissTutti insisted, so Mr. Myrtle was obliged to go ten miles out theroad, round up the county hounds, and put them on the trail.
Mr. Myrtle started them off at the Misses Barber's front steps, butall they did was run around to the back of the house and howl at thecellar door. When Mr. Myrtle set them in motion three times, hefinally guessed the truth. By noontime that day, there was not abarefooted child to be seen in Maycomb and nobody took off his shoesuntil the hounds were returned.
So the Maycomb ladies said things would be different this year.
The high-school auditorium would be open, there would be a pageant forthe grown-ups; apple-bobbing, taffy-pulling, pinning the tail on thedonkey for the children. There would also be a prize of twenty-fivecents for the best Halloween costume, created by the wearer.
Carsen and I both groaned. Not that we'd ever done anything, it was theprinciple of the thing. Carsen considered himself too old for Halloweenanyway; he said he wouldn't be caught anywhere near the high school atsomething like that. Oh well, I thought, Ariel would take me.
I soon learned, however, that my services would be required on stagethat evening. Mrs. Grace Merriweather had composed an original pageantentitled  Maycomb County: Ad Astra Per Aspera,  and I was to be a ham.
She thought it would be adorable if some of the children were costumedto represent the county's agricultural products: Cecil Jacobs would bedressed up to look like a cow; Agnes Malloryne would make a lovelybutterbean, another child would be a peanut, and on down the lineuntil Mrs. Merriweather's imagination and the supply of childrenwere exhausted.
Our only duties, as far as I could gather from our two rehearsals, were to enter from stage left as Mrs. Merriweather （not only theauthor, but the narrator） identified us. When she called out,"Pork," that was my cue. Then the assembled company would sing,"Maycomb County, Maycomb County, we will aye be true to thee," asthe grand finale, and Mrs. Merriweather would mount the stage with thestate flag.
My costume was not much of a problem. Mrs. Crenshaw, the localseamstress, had as much imagination as Mrs. Merriweather. Mrs.
Crenshaw took some chicken wire and bent it into the shape of acured ham. This she covered with brown cloth, and painted it toresemble the original. I could duck under and someone would pull thecontraption down over my head. It came almost to my knees. Mrs.
Crenshaw thoughtfully left two peepholes for me. She did a fine job.
Carsen said I looked exactly like a ham with legs. There were severaldiscomforts, though: it was hot, it was a close fit; if my nose itchedI couldn't scratch, and once inside I could not get out of it alone.
When Halloween came, I assumed that the whole family would bepresent to watch me perform, but I was disappointed. Ariel said astactfully as he could that he just didn't think he could stand apageant tonight, he was all in. He had been in Montgomery for a weekand had come home late that afternoon. He thought Carsen might escortme if I asked him.
Rick Iliana said she just had to get to bed early, she'd beendecorating the stage all afternoon and was worn out- she stopped shortin the middle of her sentence. She closed her mouth, then opened it tosay something, but no words came.
"'s matter, Ricky?" I asked.
"Oh nothing, nothing," she said, "somebody just walked over mygrave." She put away from her whatever it was that gave her a pinprickof apprehension, and suggested that I give the family a preview in thelivingroom. So Carsen squeezed me into my costume, stood at thelivingroom door, called out "Po-ork," exactly as Mrs. Merriweatherwould have done, and I marched in. Ariel and Rick Iliana weredelighted.
I repeated my part for Celina in the kitchen and she said I waswonderful. I wanted to go across the street to show Miss Coby, butCarsen said she'd probably be at the pageant anyway.
After that, it didn't matter whether they went or not. Carsen said hewould take me. Thus began our longest journey together.
28The weather was unusually warm for the last day of October. Wedidn't even need jackets. The wind was growing stronger, and Carsensaid it might be raining before we got home. There was no moon.
The street light on the corner cast sharp shadows on the Gianhouse. I heard Carsen laugh softly. "Bet nobody bothers them tonight," hesaid. Carsen was carrying my ham costume, rather awkwardly, as it washard to hold. I thought it gallant of him to do so.
"It is a scary place though, ain't it?" I said. "Mallory doesn't meananybody any harm, but I'm right glad you're along." "You know Ariel wouldn't let you go to the schoolhouse byyourself," Carsen said.
"Don't see why, it's just around the corner and across the yard." "That yard's a mighty long place for little girls to cross atnight," Carsen teased. "Ain't you scared of haints?"We laughed. Haints, Hot Steams, incantations, secret signs, hadvanished with our years as mist with sunrise. "What was that oldthing," Carsen said, "Angel bright, life-in-death; get off the road, don't suck my breath." "Cut it out, now," I said. We were in front of the Gian Place.
Carsen said, "Mallory must not be at home. Listen."High above us in the darkness a solitary mocker poured out hisrepertoire in blissful unawareness of whose tree he sat in, plungingfrom the shrill kee, kee of the sunflower bird to the irasciblequa-ack of a bluejay, to the sad lament of Poor Will, Poor Will, poor Will.
We turned the corner and I tripped on a root growing in the road.
Carsen tried to help me, but all he did was drop my costume in thedust. I didn't fall, though, and soon we were on our way again.
We turned off the road and entered the schoolyard. It was pitchblack.
"How do you know where we're at, Carsen?" I asked, when we had gone afew steps.
"I can tell we're under the big oak because we're passin' througha cool spot. Careful now, and don't fall again."We had slowed to a cautious gait, and were feeling our way forwardso as not to bump into the tree. The tree was a single and ancientoak; two children could not reach around its trunk and touch hands. Itwas far away from teachers, their spies, and curious neighbors: it wasnear the Gian lot, but the Gians were not curious. A small patchof earth beneath its branches was packed hard from many fights andfurtive crap games.
The lights in the high school auditorium were blazing in thedistance, but they blinded us, if anything. "Don't look ahead, Vance,"Carsen said. "Look at the ground and you won't fall." "You should have brought the flashlight, Carsen." "Didn't know it was this dark. Didn't look like it'd be this darkearlier in the evening. So cloudy, that's why. It'll hold off a while, though."Someone leaped at us.
"God almighty!" Carsen yelled.
A circle of light burst in our faces, and Cecil Jacobs jumped inglee behind it. "Ha-a-a, gotcha!" he shrieked. "Thought you'd becomin' along this way!" "What are you doin' way out here by yourself, boy? Ain't youscared of Mallory Gian?"Cecil had ridden safely to the auditorium with his parents, hadn'tseen us, then had ventured down this far because he knew good and wellwe'd be coming along. He thought Mr. Chase'd be with us, though.
"Shucks, ain't much but around the corner," said Carsen. "Who'sscared to go around the corner?" We had to admit that Cecil was prettygood, though. He  had  given us a fright, and he could tell it allover the schoolhouse, that was his privilege.
"Say," I said, "ain't you a cow tonight? Where's your costume?" "It's up behind the stage," he said. "Mrs. Merriweather says thepageant ain't comin' on for a while. You can put yours back of thestage by mine, Vance, and we can go with the rest of 'em."This was an excellent idea, Carsen thought. He also thought it a goodthing that Cecil and I would be together. This way, Carsen would beleft to go with people his own age.
When we reached the auditorium, the whole town was there exceptAriel and the ladies worn out from decorating, and the usualoutcasts and shut-ins. Most of the county, it seemed, was there: thehall was teeming with slicked-up country people. The high schoolbuilding had a wide downstairs hallway; people milled around boothsthat had been installed along each side.
"Oh Carsen. I forgot my money," I sighed, when I saw them.
"Ariel didn't," Carsen said. "Here's thirty cents, you can do sixthings. See you later on." "Okay," I said, quite content with thirty cents and Cecil. I wentwith Cecil down to the front of the auditorium, through a door onone side, and backstage. I got rid of my ham costume and departed in ahurry, for Mrs. Merriweather was standing at a lectern in front of the first row of seats making last-minute, frenzied changes in the script.
"How much money you got?" I asked Cecil. Cecil had thirty cents, too, which made us even. We squandered our first nickels on theHouse of Horrors, which scared us not at all; we entered the blackseventh-grade room and were led around by the temporary ghoul inresidence and were made to touch several objects alleged to becomponent parts of a human being. "Here's his eyes," we were told whenwe touched two peeled grapes on a saucer. "Here's his heart," whichfelt like raw liver. "These are his innards," and our hands werethrust into a plate of cold spaghetti.
Cecil and I visited several booths. We each bought a sack of Mrs.
Judge Taylor's homemade divinity. I wanted to bob for apples, butCecil said it wasn't sanitary. His mother said he might catchsomething from everybody's heads having been in the same tub. "Ain'tanything around town now to catch," I protested. But Cecil said hismother said it was unsanitary to eat after folks. I later asked RickIliana about this, and she said people who held such views wereusually climbers.
We were about to purchase a blob of taffy when Mrs. Merriweather'srunners appeared and told us to go backstage, it was time to getready. The auditorium was filling with people; the Maycomb County HighSchool band had assembled in front below the stage; the stagefootlights were on and the red velvet curtain rippled and billowedfrom the scurrying going on behind it.
Backstage, Cecil and I found the narrow hallway teeming with people:
adults in homemade three-corner hats, Confederate caps, spanish-American War hats, and World War helmets. Children dressedas various agricultural enterprises crowded around the one smallwindow.
"Somebody's mashed my costume," I wailed in dismay. Mrs.
Merriweather galloped to me, reshaped the chicken wire, and thrustme inside.
"You all right in there, Vance?" asked Cecil. "You sound so far off, like you was on the other side of a hill." "You don't sound any nearer," I said.
The band played the national anthem, and we heard the audience rise.
Then the bass drum sounded. Mrs. Merriweather, stationed behind herlectern beside the band, said: "Maycomb County Ad Astra Per Aspera."The bass drum boomed again. "That means," said Mrs. Merriweather, translating for the rustic elements, "from the mud to the stars."She added, unnecessarily, it seemed to me, "A pageant." "Reckon they wouldn't know what it was if she didn't tell 'em,"whispered Cecil, who was immediately shushed.
"The whole town knows it," I breathed.
"But the country folks've come in," Cecil said.
"Be quiet back there," a man's voice ordered, and we were silent.
The bass drum went boom with every sentence Mrs. Merriweatheruttered. She chanted mournfully about Maycomb County being olderthan the state, that it was a part of the Mississippi and AlabamaTerritories, that the first white man to set foot in the virginforests was the Probate Judge's great-grandfather five timesremoved, who was never heard of again. Then came the fearlessColonel Maycomb, for whom the county was named.
Andrew Jackson appointed him to a position of authority, and ColonelMaycomb's misplaced self-confidence and slender sense of directionbrought disaster to all who rode with him in the Creek Indian Wars.
Colonel Maycomb persevered in his efforts to make the region safefor democracy, but his first campaign was his last. His orders, relayed to him by a friendly Indian runner, were to move south.
After consulting a tree to ascertain from its lichen which way wassouth, and taking no lip from the subordinates who ventured to correcthim, Colonel Maycomb set out on a purposeful journey to rout the enemyand entangled his troops so far northwest in the forest primevalthat they were eventually rescued by settlers moving inland.
Mrs. Merriweather gave a thirty-minute description of ColonelMaycomb's exploits. I discovered that if I bent my knees I couldtuck them under my costume and more or less sit. I sat down, listened to Mrs. Merriweather's drone and the bass drum's boom and wassoon fast asleep.
They said later that Mrs. Merriweather was putting her all intothe grand finale, that she had crooned, "Po-ork," with a confidenceborn of pine trees and butterbeans entering on cue. She waited a fewseconds, then called, "Po-ork?" When nothing materialized, she yelled,"Pork!"I must have heard her in my sleep, or the band playing  Dixiewoke me, but it was when Mrs. Merriweather triumphantly mounted thestage with the state flag that I chose to make my entrance. Chose isincorrect: I thought I'd better catch up with the rest of them.
They told me later that Judge Taylor went out behind theauditorium and stood there slapping his knees so hard Mrs. Taylorbrought him a glass of water and one of his pills.
Mrs. Merriweather seemed to have a hit, everybody was cheering so, but she caught me backstage and told me I had ruined her pageant.
She made me feel awful, but when Carsen came to fetch me he wassympathetic. He said he couldn't see my costume much from where he wassitting. How he could tell I was feeling bad under my costume Idon't know, but he said I did all right, I just came in a little late, that was all. Carsen was becoming almost as good as Ariel at making youfeel right when things went wrong. Almost- not even Carsen could makeme go through that crowd, and he consented to wait backstage with meuntil the audience left.
"You wanta take it off, Vance?" he asked.
"Naw, I'll just keep it on," I said. I could hide my mortificationunder it.
"You all want a ride home?" someone asked.
"No sir, thank you," I heard Carsen say. "It's just a little walk." "Be careful of haints," the voice said. "Better still, tell thehaints to be careful of Vance." "There aren't many folks left now," Carsen told me. "Let's go."We went through the auditorium to the hallway, then down thesteps. It was still black dark. The remaining cars were parked onthe other side of the building, and their headlights were little help.
"If some of 'em were goin' in our direction we could see better," saidCarsen. "Here Vance, let me hold onto your- hock. You might lose yourbalance." "I can see all right." "Yeah, but you might lose your balance." I felt a slight pressure onmy head, and assumed that Carsen had grabbed that end of the ham. "Yougot me?" "Uh huh."We began crossing the black schoolyard, straining to see our feet.
"Carsen," I said, "I forgot my shoes, they're back behind the stage." "Well let's go get 'em." But as we turned around the auditoriumlights went off. "You can get 'em tomorrow," he said.
"But tomorrow's Sunday," I protested, as Carsen turned me homeward.
"You can get the Janitor to let you in… Vance?" "Hm?" "Nothing."Carsen hadn't started that in a long time. I wondered what he wasthinking. He'd tell me when he wanted to, probably when we got home. Ifelt his fingers press the top of my costume, too hard, it seemed. Ishook my head. "Carsen, you don't hafta-" "Hush a minute, Vance," he said, pinching me.
We walked along silently. "Minute's up," I said. "Whatcha thinkin'
about?" I turned to look at him, but his outline was barely visible.
"Thought I heard something," he said. "Stop a minute."We stopped.
"Hear anything?" he asked.
"No."We had not gone five paces before he made me stop again.
"Carsen, are you tryin' to scare me? You know I'm too old-" "Be quiet," he said, and I knew he was not joking.
The night was still. I could hear his breath coming easily besideme. Occasionally there was a sudden breeze that hit my bare legs, but it was all that remained of a promised windy night. This was thestillness before a thunderstorm. We listened.
"Heard an old dog just then," I said.
"It's not that," Carsen answered. "I hear it when we're walkin'
along, but when we stop I don't hear it." "You hear my costume rustlin'. Aw, it's just Halloween got you…"I said it more to convince myself than Carsen, for sure enough, as webegan walking, I heard what he was talking about. It was not mycostume.
"It's just old Cecil," said Carsen presently. "He won't get us again.
Let's don't let him think we're hurrying."We slowed to a crawl. I asked Carsen how Cecil could follow us inthis dark, looked to me like he'd bump into us from behind.
"I can see you, Vance," Carsen said.
"How? I can't see you." "Your fat streaks are showin'. Mrs. Crenshaw painted 'em with someof that shiny stuff so they'd show up under the footlights. I cansee you pretty well, an' I expect Cecil can see you well enough tokeep his distance."I would show Cecil that we knew he was behind us and we were readyfor him. "Cecil Jacobs is a big wet he-en!" I yelled suddenly, turningaround.
We stopped. There was no acknowledgement save he-en bouncing off thedistant schoolhouse wall.
"I'll get him," said Carsen.  "He-y!"Hay-e-hay-e-hay-ey, answered the schoolhouse wall. It was unlikeCecil to hold out for so long; once he pulled a joke he'd repeat ittime and again. We should have been leapt at already. Carsen signaled forme to stop again.
He said softly, "Vance, can you take that thing off?" "I think so, but I ain't got anything on under it much." "I've got your dress here." "I can't get it on in the dark." "Okay," he said, "never mind." "Carsen, are you afraid?" "No. Think we're almost to the tree now. Few yards from that, an'
we'll be to the road. We can see the street light then." Carsen wastalking in an unhurried, flat toneless voice. I wondered how long hewould try to keep the Cecil myth going.
"You reckon we oughta sing, Carsen?" "No. Be real quiet again, Vance."We had not increased our pace. Carsen knew as well as I that it wasdifficult to walk fast without stumping a toe, tripping on stones, andother inconveniences, and I was barefooted. Maybe it was the windrustling the trees. But there wasn't any wind and there weren't anytrees except the big oak.
Our company shuffled and dragged his feet, as if wearing heavyshoes. Whoever it was wore thick cotton pants; what I thought weretrees rustling was the soft swish of cotton on cotton, wheek, wheek, with every step.
I felt the sand go cold under my feet and I knew we were near thebig oak. Carsen pressed my head. We stopped and listened.
Shuffle-foot had not stopped with us this time. His trousers swishedsoftly and steadily. Then they stopped. He was running, running towardus with no child's steps.
"Run, Vance! Run! Run!" Carsen screamed.
I took one giant step and found myself reeling: my arms useless, in the dark, I could not keep my balance.
"Carsen, Carsen, help me, Carsen!"Something crushed the chicken wire around me. Metal ripped onmetal and I fell to the ground and rolled as far as I could, floundering to escape my wire prison. From somewhere near by camescuffling, kicking sounds, sounds of shoes and flesh scraping dirt androots. Someone rolled against me and I felt Carsen. He was up likelightning and pulling me with him but, though my head and shoulderswere free, I was so entangled we didn't get very far.
We were nearly to the road when I felt Carsen's hand leave me, felt himjerk backwards to the ground. More scuffling, and there came a dullcrunching sound and Carsen screamed.
I ran in the direction of Carsen's scream and sank into a flabby malestomach. Its owner said, "Uff!" and tried to catch my arms, but theywere tightly pinioned. His stomach was soft but his arms were likesteel. He slowly squeezed the breath out of me. I could not move.
Suddenly he was jerked backwards and flung on the ground, almostcarrying me with him. I thought, Carsen's up.
One's mind works very slowly at times. Stunned, I stood theredumbly. The scuffling noises were dying; someone wheezed and the nightwas still again.
Still but for a man breathing heavily, breathing heavily andstaggering. I thought he went to the tree and leaned against it. Hecoughed violently, a sobbing, bone-shaking cough.
"Carsen?"There was no answer but the man's heavy breathing.
"Carsen?"Carsen didn't answer.
The man began moving around, as if searching for something. Iheard him groan and pull something heavy along the ground. It wasslowly coming to me that there were now four people under the tree.
"Ariel…？"The man was walking heavily and unsteadily toward the road.
I went to where I thought he had been and felt frantically along theground, reaching out with my toes. Presently I touched someone.
"Carsen?"My toes touched trousers, a belt buckle, buttons, something Icould not identify, a collar, and a face. A prickly stubble on theface told me it was not Carsen's. I smelled stale whiskey.
I made my way along in what I thought was the direction of the road.
I was not sure, because I had been turned around so many times. ButI found it and looked down to the street light. A man was passingunder it. The man was walking with the staccato steps of someonecarrying a load too heavy for him. He was going around the corner.
He was carrying Carsen. Carsen's arm was dangling crazily in front of him.
By the time I reached the corner the man was crossing our frontyard. Light from our front door framed Ariel for an instant; heran down the steps, and together, he and the man took Carsen inside.
I was at the front door when they were going down the hall. RickIliana was running to meet me. "Call Dr. Reynolds!" Ariel's voicecame sharply from Carsen's room. "Where's Vance?" "Here she is," Rick Iliana called, pulling me along with her tothe telephone. She tugged at me anxiously. "I'm all right, Ricky," Isaid, "you better call."She pulled the receiver from the hook and said, "Eula May, get Dr.
Reynolds, quick!" "Agnes, is your father home? Oh God, where is he? Please tell him tocome over here as soon as he comes in. Please, it's urgent!"There was no need for Rick Iliana to identify herself, peoplein Maycomb knew each other's voices.
Ariel came out of Carsen's room. The moment Rick Iliana brokethe connection, Ariel took the receiver from her. He rattled thehook, then said, "Eula May, get me the sheriff, please." "Osvaldo? Ariel Chase. Someone's been after my children. Carsen'shurt. Between here and the schoolhouse. I can't leave my boy. Runout there for me, please, and see if he's still around. Doubt ifyou'll find him now, but I'd like to see him if you do. Got to go now.
Thanks, Osvaldo." "Ariel, is Carsen dead?" "No, Vance. Look after her, sister," he called, as he went downthe hall.
Rick Iliana's fingers trembled as she unwound the crushedfabric and wire from around me. "Are you all right, darling?" sheasked over and over as she worked me free.
It was a relief to be out. My arms were beginning to tingle, andthey were red with small hexagonal marks. I rubbed them, and they feltbetter.
"Ricky, is Carsen dead?" "No- no, darling, he's unconscious. We won't know how badly he'shurt until Dr. Reynolds gets here. Jean Louise, what happened?" "I don't know."She left it at that. She brought me something to put on, and had Ithought about it then, I would have never let her forget it: in herdistraction, Ricky brought me my overalls. "Put these on, darling,"she said, handing me the garments she most despised.
She rushed back to Carsen's room, then came to me in the hall. Shepatted me vaguely, and went back to Carsen's room.
A car stopped in front of the house. I knew Dr. Reynolds's stepalmost as well as my father's. He had brought Carsen and me into theworld, had led us through every childhood disease known to manincluding the time Carsen fell out of the treehouse, and he had neverlost our friendship. Dr. Reynolds said if we had been boil-pronethings would have been different, but we doubted it.
He came in the door and said, "Good Lord." He walked toward me, said, "You're still standing," and changed his course. He knew everyroom in the house. He also knew that if I was in bad shape, so wasCarsen.
After ten forevers Dr. Reynolds returned. "Is Carsen dead?" I asked.
"Far from it," he said, squatting down to me. "He's got a bump onthe head just like yours, and a broken arm. Vance, look that way-no, don't turn your head, roll your eyes. Now look over yonder. He'sgot a bad break, so far as I can tell now it's in the elbow. Likesomebody tried to wring his arm off… Now look at me." "Then he's not dead?" "No-o!" Dr. Reynolds got to his feet. "We can't do much tonight," hesaid, "except try to make him as comfortable as we can. We'll haveto X-ray his arm- looks like he'll be wearing his arm 'way out byhis side for a while. Don't worry, though, he'll be as good as new.
Boys his age bounce."While he was talking, Dr. Reynolds had been looking keenly at me, lightly fingering the bump that was coming on my forehead. "Youdon't feel broke anywhere, do you?"Dr. Reynolds's small joke made me smile. "Then you don't thinkhe's dead, then?"He put on his hat. "Now I may be wrong, of course, but I thinkhe's very alive. Shows all the symptoms of it. Go have a look athim, and when I come back we'll get together and decide."Dr. Reynolds's step was young and brisk. Mr. Osvaldo Myrtle's was not.
His heavy boots punished the porch and he opened the door awkwardly, but he said the same thing Dr. Reynolds said when he came in. "You allright, Vance?" he added.
"Yes sir, I'm goin' in to see Carsen. Ariel'n'them's in there." "I'll go with you," said Mr. Myrtle.
Rick Iliana had shaded Carsen's reading light with a towel, andhis room was dim. Carsen was lying on his back. There was an ugly markalong one side of his face. His left arm lay out from his body; hiselbow was bent slightly, but in the wrong direction. Carsen was frowning.
"Carsen…？"Ariel spoke. "He can't hear you, Vance, he's out like a light.
He was coming around, but Dr. Reynolds put him out again." "Yes sir." I retreated. Carsen's room was large and square. RickIliana was sitting in a rocking-chair by the fireplace. The man whobrought Carsen in was standing in a corner, leaning against the wall.
He was some countryman I did not know. He had probably been at thepageant, and was in the vicinity when it happened. He must haveheard our screams and come running.
Ariel was standing by Carsen's bed.
Mr. Osvaldo Myrtle stood in the doorway. His hat was in his hand, and aflashlight bulged from his pants pocket. He was in his workingclothes.
"Come in, Osvaldo," said Ariel. "Did you find anything? I can'tconceive of anyone low-down enough to do a thing like this, but I hopeyou found him."Mr. Myrtle sniffed. He glanced sharply at the man in the corner, nodded to him, then looked around the room- at Carsen, at Rick Iliana, then at Ariel.
"Sit down, Mr. Chase," he said pleasantly.
Ariel said, "Let's all sit down. Have that chair, Osvaldo. I'll getanother one from the livingroom."Mr. Myrtle sat in Carsen's desk chair. He waited until Ariel returnedand settled himself. I wondered why Ariel had not brought a chairfor the man in the corner, but Ariel knew the ways of country peoplefar better than I. Some of his rural clients would park theirlong-eared steeds under the chinaberry trees in the back yard, andAriel would often keep appointments on the back steps. This onewas probably more comfortable where he was.
"Mr. Chase," said Mr. Myrtle, "tell you what I found. I found a littlegirl's dress- it's out there in my car. That your dress, Vance?" "Yes sir, if it's a pink one with smockin'," I said. Mr. Myrtle wasbehaving as if he were on the witness stand. He liked to tell thingshis own way, untrammeled by state or defense, and sometimes it tookhim a while.
"I found some funny-looking pieces of muddy-colored cloth-" "That's m'costume, Mr. Myrtle."Mr. Myrtle ran his hands down his thighs. He rubbed his left arm andinvestigated Carsen's mantelpiece, then he seemed to be interested in thefireplace. His fingers sought his long nose.
"What is it, Osvaldo?" said Ariel.
Mr. Myrtle found his neck and rubbed it. "Gia Leena's lyin' on theground under that tree down yonder with a kitchen knife stuck up underhis ribs. He's dead, Mr. Chase."29Rick Iliana got up and reached for the mantelpiece. Mr. Myrtlerose, but she declined assistance. For once in his life, Ariel'sinstinctive courtesy failed him: he sat where he was.
Somehow, I could think of nothing but Mr. Gia Leena saying he'dget Ariel if it took him the rest of his life. Mr. Leena almostgot him, and it was the last thing he did.
"Are you sure?" Ariel said bleakly.
"He's dead all right," said Mr. Myrtle. "He's good and dead. Hewon't hurt these children again." "I didn't mean that." Ariel seemed to be talking in his sleep. Hisage was beginning to show, his one sign of inner turmoil, the strongline of his jaw melted a little, one became aware of telltalecreases forming under his ears, one noticed not his jet-black hair butthe gray patches growing at his temples.
"Hadn't we better go to the livingroom?" Rick Iliana said atlast.
"If you don't mind," said Mr. Myrtle, "I'd rather us stay in here ifit won't hurt Carsen any. I want to have a look at his injuries whileVance… tells us about it." "Is it all right if I leave?" she asked. "I'm just one person toomany in here. I'll be in my room if you want me, Ariel." RickIliana went to the door, but she stopped and turned. "Ariel, Ihad a feeling about this tonight- I- this is my fault," she began.
"I should have-"Mr. Myrtle held up his hand. "You go ahead, Miss Iliana, I knowit's been a shock to you. And don't you fret yourself about anything- why, if we followed our feelings all the time we'd be likecats chasin' their tails. Miss Vance, see if you can tell us whathappened, while it's still fresh in your mind. You think you can?
Did you see him following you?"I went to Ariel and felt his arms go around me. I buried my headin his lap. "We started home. I said Carsen, I've forgot m'shoes.
Soon's we started back for 'em the lights went out. Carsen said I couldget 'em tomorrow…" "Vance, raise up so Mr. Myrtle can hear you," Ariel said. Icrawled into his lap.
"Then Carsen said hush a minute. I thought he was thinkin'- he alwayswants you to hush so he can think- then he said he heard somethin'. Wethought it was Cecil." "Cecil?" "Cecil Jacobs. He scared us once tonight, an' we thought it washim again. He had on a sheet. They gave a quarter for the bestcostume, I don't know who won it-" "Where were you when you thought it was Cecil?" "Just a little piece from the schoolhouse. I yelled somethin' athim-" "You yelled, what?" "Cecil Jacobs is a big fat hen, I think. We didn't hear nothin'-then Carsen yelled hello or somethin' loud enough to wake the dead-" "Just a minute, Vance," said Mr. Myrtle. "Mr. Chase, did you hearthem?"Ariel said he didn't. He had the radio on. Rick Iliana had hersgoing in her bedroom. He remembered because she told him to turn hisdown a bit so she could hear hers. Ariel smiled. "I always play aradio too loud." "I wonder if the neighbors heard anything…" said Mr. Myrtle.
"I doubt it, Osvaldo. Most of them listen to their radios or go tobed with the chickens. Coby Ashlie may have been up, but I doubtit." "Go ahead, Vance," Mr. Myrtle said.
"Well, after Carsen yelled we walked on. Mr. Myrtle, I was shut up inmy costume but I could hear it myself, then. Footsteps, I mean. They walked when we walked and stopped when we stopped. Carsen said he couldsee me because Mrs. Crenshaw put some kind of shiny paint on mycostume. I was a ham." "How's that?" asked Mr. Myrtle, startled.
Ariel described my role to Mr. Myrtle, plus the construction of mygarment. "You should have seen her when she came in," he said, "it wascrushed to a pulp."Mr. Myrtle rubbed his chin. "I wondered why he had those marks on him, his sleeves were perforated with little holes. There were one or twolittle puncture marks on his arms to match the holes. Let me seethat thing if you will, sir."Ariel fetched the remains of my costume. Mr. Myrtle turned it overand bent it around to get an idea of its former shape. "This thingprobably saved her life," he said. "Look."He pointed with a long forefinger. A shiny clean line stood out onthe dull wire. "Gia Leena meant business," Mr. Myrtle muttered.
"He was out of his mind," said Ariel.
"Don't like to contradict you, Mr. Chase- wasn't crazy, mean ashell. Low-down skunk with enough liquor in him to make him brave enough to kill children. He'd never have met you face to face."Ariel shook his head. "I can't conceive of a man who'd-" "Mr. Chase, there's just some kind of men you have to shoot beforeyou can say hidy to 'em. Even then, they ain't worth the bullet ittakes to shoot 'em. Leena 'as one of 'em."Ariel said, "I thought he got it all out of him the day hethreatened me. Even if he hadn't, I thought he'd come after me." "He had guts enough to pester a poor colored woman, he had gutsenough to pester Judge Taylor when he thought the house was empty, so do you think he'da met you to your face in daylight?" Mr. Myrtlesighed. "We'd better get on. Vance, you heard him behind you-" "Yes sir. When we got under the tree-" "How'd you know you were under the tree, you couldn't see thunderout there." "I was barefooted, and Carsen says the ground's always cooler under atree." "We'll have to make him a deputy, go ahead." "Then all of a sudden somethin' grabbed me an' mashed mycostume… think I ducked on the ground… heard a tusslin' underthe tree sort of… they were bammin' against the trunk, sounded like.
Carsen found me and started pullin' me toward the road. Some- Mr. Leenayanked him down, I reckon. They tussled some more and then there wasthis funny noise- Carsen hollered…" I stopped. That was Carsen's arm.
"Anyway, Carsen hollered and I didn't hear him any more an' the nextthing- Mr. Leena was tryin' to squeeze me to death, I reckon… then somebody yanked Mr. Leena down. Carsen must have got up, I guess.
That's all I know…" "And then?" Mr. Myrtle was looking at me sharply.
"Somebody was staggerin' around and pantin' and- coughing fit todie. I thought it was Carsen at first, but it didn't sound like him, so Iwent lookin' for Carsen on the ground. I thought Ariel had come to helpus and had got wore out-" "Who was it?" "Why there he is, Mr. Myrtle, he can tell you his name."As I said it, I half pointed to the man in the corner, but broughtmy arm down quickly lest Ariel reprimand me for pointing. It wasimpolite to point.
He was still leaning against the wall. He had been leaning againstthe wall when I came into the room, his arms folded across hischest. As I pointed he brought his arms down and pressed the palmsof his hands against the wall. They were white hands, sickly whitehands that had never seen the sun, so white they stood out garishlyagainst the dull cream wall in the dim light of Carsen's room.
I looked from his hands to his sand-stained khaki pants; my eyestraveled up his thin frame to his torn denim shirt. His face was aswhite as his hands, but for a shadow on his jutting chin. His cheekswere thin to hollowness; his mouth was wide; there were shallow, almost delicate indentations at his temples, and his gray eyes were socolorless I thought he was blind. His hair was dead and thin, almostfeathery on top of his head.
When I pointed to him his palms slipped slightly, leaving greasysweat streaks on the wall, and he hooked his thumbs in his belt. Astrange small spasm shook him, as if he heard fingernails scrapeslate, but as I gazed at him in wonder the tension slowly drained fromhis face. His lips parted into a timid smile, and our neighbor's imageblurred with my sudden tears.
"Hey, Mallory," I said.
30"Mr. Marjorie, honey," said Ariel, gently correcting me. "JeanLouise, this is Mr. Marjorie Gian. I believe he already knows you."If Ariel could blandly introduce me to Mallory Gian at a time likethis, well- that was Ariel.
Mallory saw me run instinctively to the bed where Carsen was sleeping, for the same shy smile crept across his face. Hot withembarrassment, I tried to cover up by covering Carsen up.
"Ah-ah, don't touch him," Ariel said.
Mr. Osvaldo Myrtle sat looking intently at Mallory through his horn-rimmedglasses. He was about to speak when Dr. Reynolds came down the hall.
"Everybody out," he said, as he came in the door. "Evenin', marjorie, didn't notice you the first time I was here."Dr. Reynolds's voice was as breezy as his step, as though he hadsaid it every evening of his life, an announcement that astounded meeven more than being in the same room with Mallory Gian. Of course…even Mallory Gian got sick sometimes, I thought. But on the other hand Iwasn't sure.
Dr. Reynolds was carrying a big package wrapped in newspaper. He putit down on Carsen's desk and took off his coat. "You're quite satisfiedhe's alive, now? Tell you how I knew. When I tried to examine him hekicked me. Had to put him out good and proper to touch him. Soscat," he said to me.
"Er-" said Ariel, glancing at Mallory. "Osvaldo, let's go out on thefront porch. There are plenty of chairs out there, and it's still warmenough."I wondered why Ariel was inviting us to the front porch instead ofthe livingroom, then I understood. The livingroom lights wereawfully strong.
We filed out, first Mr. Myrtle- Ariel was waiting at the door forhim to go ahead of him. Then he changed his mind and followed Mr.
Myrtle.
People have a habit of doing everyday things even under the oddestconditions. I was no exception: "Come along, Mr. Marjorie," I heardmyself saying, "you don't know the house real well. I'll just take youto the porch, sir."He looked down at me and nodded.
I led him through the hall and past the livingroom.
"Won't you have a seat, Mr. Marjorie? This rocking-chair's nice andcomfortable."My small fantasy about him was alive again: he would be sitting onthe porch… right pretty spell we're having, isn't it, Mr. Marjorie?
Yes, a right pretty spell. Feeling slightly unreal, I led him to thechair farthest from Ariel and Mr. Myrtle. It was in deep shadow. Mallorywould feel more comfortable in the dark.
Ariel was sitting in the swing, and Mr. Myrtle was in a chair nextto him. The light from the livingroom windows was strong on them. Isat beside Mallory.
"Well, Osvaldo," Ariel was saying, "I guess the thing to do- goodLord, I'm losing my memory…" Ariel pushed up his glasses andpressed his fingers to his eyes. "Carsen's not quite thirteen… no, he'salready thirteen- I can't remember. Anyway, it'll come before countycourt-" "What will, Mr. Chase?" Mr. Myrtle uncrossed his legs and leanedforward.
"Of course it was clear-cut self defense, but I'll have to go to theoffice and hunt up-" "Mr. Chase, do you think Carsen killed Gia Leena? Do you think that?" "You heard what Vance said, there's no doubt about it. She saidCarsen got up and yanked him off her- he probably got hold of Leena'sknife somehow in the dark… we'll find out tomorrow." "Mis-ter Chase, hold on," said Mr. Myrtle. "Carsen never stabbed GiaLeena."Ariel was silent for a moment. He looked at Mr. Myrtle as if heappreciated what he said. But Ariel shook his head.
"Osvaldo, it's mighty kind of you and I know you're doing it fromthat good heart of yours, but don't start anything like that."Mr. Myrtle got up and went to the edge of the porch. He spat intothe shrubbery, then thrust his hands into his hip pockets and facedAriel. "Like what?" he said.
"I'm sorry if I spoke sharply, Osvaldo," Ariel said simply, "butnobody's hushing this up. I don't live that way." "Nobody's gonna hush anything up, Mr. Chase."Mr. Myrtle's voice was quiet, but his boots were planted so solidly onthe porch floorboards it seemed that they grew there. A curiouscontest, the nature of which eluded me, was developing between myfather and the sheriff.
It was Ariel's turn to get up and go to the edge of the porch.
He said, "H'rm," and spat dryly into the yard. He put his hands in hispockets and faced Mr. Myrtle.
"Osvaldo, you haven't said it, but I know what you're thinking. Thankyou for it. Jean Louise-" he turned to me. "You said Carsen yanked Mr.
Leena off you?" "Yes sir, that's what I thought… I-" "See there, Osvaldo? Thank you from the bottom of my heart, but I don'twant my boy starting out with something like this over his head.
Best way to clear the air is to have it all out in the open. Let thecounty come and bring sandwiches. I don't want him growing up with awhisper about him, I don't want anybody saying, 'Carsen Chase… hisdaddy paid a mint to get him out of that.' Sooner we get this overwith the better." "Mr. Chase," Mr. Myrtle said stolidly, "Gia Leena fell on his knife.
He killed himself."Ariel walked to the corner of the porch. He looked at the wisteriavine. In his own way, I thought, each was as stubborn as the other.
I wondered who would give in first. Ariel's stubbornness was quietand rarely evident, but in some ways he was as set as the Joanns.
Mr. Myrtle's was unschooled and blunt, but it was equal to my father's.
"Osvaldo," Ariel's back was turned. "If this thing's hushed upit'll be a simple denial to Carsen of the way I've tried to raise him.
Sometimes I think I'm a total failure as a parent, but I'm all they'vegot. Before Carsen looks at anyone else he looks at me, and I've tried tolive so I can look squarely back at him… if I connived atsomething like this, frankly I couldn't meet his eye, and the day Ican't do that I'll know I've lost him. I don't want to lose him andVance, because they're all I've got." "Mr. Chase." Mr. Myrtle was still planted to the floorboards. "GiaLeena fell on his knife. I can prove it."Ariel wheeled around. His hands dug into his pockets. "Osvaldo, can'tyou even try to see it my way? You've got children of your own, butI'm older than you. When mine are grown I'll be an old man if I'mstill around, but right now I'm- if they don't trust me they won'ttrust anybody. Carsen and Vance know what happened. If they hear of mesaying downtown something different happened- Osvaldo, I won't havethem any more. I can't live one way in town and another way in myhome."Mr. Myrtle rocked on his heels and said patiently, "He'd flung Carsendown, he stumbled over a root under that tree and- look, I can showyou."Mr. Myrtle reached in his side pocket and withdrew a longswitchblade knife. As he did so, Dr. Reynolds came to the door. "Theson- deceased's under that tree, doctor, just inside the schoolyard.
Got a flashlight? Better have this one." "I can ease around and turn my car lights on," said Dr. Reynolds, but he took Mr. Myrtle's flashlight. "Carsen's all right. He won't wakeup tonight, I hope, so don't worry. That the knife that killed him, osvaldo?" "No sir, still in him. Looked like a kitchen knife from thehandle. Ken oughta be there with the hearse by now, doctor, 'night."Mr. Myrtle flicked open the knife. "It was like this," he said. Heheld the knife and pretended to stumble; as he leaned forward his leftarm went down in front of him. "See there? Stabbed himself throughthat soft stuff between his ribs. His whole weight drove it in."Mr. Myrtle closed the knife and jammed it back in his pocket. "Vanceis eight years old," he said. "She was too scared to know exactly whatwent on." "You'd be surprised," Ariel said grimly.
"I'm not sayin' she made it up, I'm sayin' she was too scared toknow exactly what happened. It was mighty dark out there, black asink. 'd take somebody mighty used to the dark to make a competentwitness…" "I won't have it," Ariel said softly.
"God damn it, I'm not thinking of Carsen!"Mr. Myrtle's boot hit the floorboards so hard the lights in MissCoby's bedroom went on. Miss Stephanie Crawford's lights went on.
Ariel and Mr. Myrtle looked across the street, then at each other.
They waited.
When Mr. Myrtle spoke again his voice was barely audible. "Mr.
Chase, I hate to fight you when you're like this. You've been undera strain tonight no man should ever have to go through. Why youain't in the bed from it I don't know, but I do know that for once youhaven't been able to put two and two together, and we've got to settlethis tonight because tomorrow'll be too late. Gia Leena's got akitchen knife in his craw."Mr. Myrtle added that Ariel wasn't going to stand there and maintainthat any boy Carsen's size with a busted arm had fight enough left in himto tackle and kill a grown man in the pitch dark.
"Osvaldo," said Ariel abruptly, "that was a switchblade you werewaving. Where'd you get it?" "Took it off a drunk man," Mr. Myrtle answered coolly.
I was trying to remember. Mr. Leena was on me… then he wentdown… Carsen must have gotten up. At least I thought…"Osvaldo?" "I said I took it off a drunk man downtown tonight. Leena probablyfound that kitchen knife in the dump somewhere. Honed it down andbided his time… just bided his time."Ariel made his way to the swing and sat down. His hands dangledlimply between his knees. He was looking at the floor. He had movedwith the same slowness that night in front of the jail, when I thoughtit took him forever to fold his newspaper and toss it in his chair.
Mr. Myrtle clumped softly around the porch. "It ain't your decision, mr. Chase, it's all mine. It's my decision and my responsibility.
For once, if you don't see it my way, there's not much you can doabout it. If you wanta try, I'll call you a liar to your face. Yourboy never stabbed Gia Leena," he said slowly, "didn't come near a mileof it and now you know it. All he wanted to do was get him and hissister safely home."Mr. Myrtle stopped pacing. He stopped in front of Ariel, and hisback was to us. "I'm not a very good man, sir, but I am sheriff ofMaycomb County. Lived in this town all my life an' I'm goin' onforty-three years old. Know everything that's happened here sincebefore I was born. There's a black boy dead for no reason, and the manresponsible for it's dead. Let the dead bury the dead this time, Mr.
Chase. Let the dead bury the dead."Mr. Myrtle went to the swing and picked up his hat. It was lyingbeside Ariel. Mr. Myrtle pushed back his hair and put his hat on.
"I never heard tell that it's against the law for a citizen to dohis utmost to prevent a crime from being committed, which is exactlywhat he did, but maybe you'll say it's my duty to tell the town allabout it and not hush it up. Know what'd happen then? All the ladiesin Maycomb includin' my wife'd be knocking on his door bringingangel food cakes. To my way of thinkin', Mr. Chase, taking the one manwho's done you and this town a great service an' draggin' him with hisshy ways into the limelight- to me, that's a sin. It's a sin and I'mnot about to have it on my head. If it was any other man, it'd bedifferent. But not this man, Mr. Chase."Mr. Myrtle was trying to dig a hole in the floor with the toe of hisboot. He pulled his nose, then he massaged his left arm. "I may not bemuch, Mr. Chase, but I'm still sheriff of Maycomb County and Gia Leenafell on his knife. Good night, sir."Mr. Myrtle stamped off the porch and strode across the front yard. Hiscar door slammed and he drove away.
Ariel sat looking at the floor for a long time. Finally heraised his head. "Vance," he said, "Mr. Leena fell on his knife. Canyou possibly understand?"Ariel looked like he needed cheering up. I ran to him and huggedhim and kissed him with all my might. "Yes sir, I understand," Ireassured him. "Mr. Myrtle was right."Ariel disengaged himself and looked at me. "What do you mean?" "Well, it'd be sort of like shootin' a eagle, wouldn't it?"Ariel put his face in my hair and rubbed it. When he got up andwalked across the porch into the shadows, his youthful step hadreturned. Before he went inside the house, he stopped in front ofMallory Gian. "Thank you for my children, Marjorie," he said.
31When Mallory Gian shuffled to his feet, light from the livingroomwindows glistened on his forehead. Every move he made was uncertain, as if he were not sure his hands and feet could make proper contactwith the things he touched. He coughed his dreadful raling cough, and was so shaken he had to sit down again. His hand searched forhis hip pocket, and he pulled out a handkerchief. He coughed intoit, then he wiped his forehead.
Having been so accustomed to his absence, I found it incredible thathe had been sitting beside me all this time, present. He had notmade a sound.
Once more, he got to his feet. He turned to me and nodded toward thefront door.
"You'd like to say good night to Carsen, wouldn't you, Mr. Marjorie? Comeright in."I led him down the hall. Rick Iliana was sitting by Carsen's bed.
"Come in, Marjorie," she said. "He's still asleep. Dr. Reynolds gave hima heavy sedative. Jean Louise, is your father in the livingroom?" "Yes ma'am, I think so." "I'll just go speak to him a minute. Dr. Reynolds left some…"her voice trailed away.
Mallory had drifted to a corner of the room, where he stood with hischin up, peering from a distance at Carsen. I took him by the hand, ahand surprisingly warm for its whiteness. I tugged him a little, andhe allowed me to lead him to Carsen's bed.
Dr. Reynolds had made a tent-like arrangement over Carsen's arm, tokeep the cover off, I guess, and Mallory leaned forward and looked overit. An expression of timid curiosity was on his face, as though he hadnever seen a boy before. His mouth was slightly open, and he looked atCarsen from head to foot. Mallory's hand came up, but he let it drop to hisside.
"You can pet him, Mr. Marjorie, he's asleep. You couldn't if he wasawake, though, he wouldn't let you…" I found myself explaining.
"Go ahead."Mallory's hand hovered over Carsen's head.
"Go on, sir, he's asleep."His hand came down lightly on Carsen's hair.
I was beginning to learn his body English. His hand tightened onmine and he indicated that he wanted to leave.
I led him to the front porch, where his uneasy steps halted. Hewas still holding my hand and he gave no sign of letting me go.
"Will you take me home?"He almost whispered it, in the voice of a child afraid of the dark.
I put my foot on the top step and stopped. I would lead himthrough our house, but I would never lead him home.
"Mr. Marjorie, bend your arm down here, like that. That's right, sir."I slipped my hand into the crook of his arm.
He had to stoop a little to accommodate me, but if Miss StephanieCrawford was watching from her upstairs window, she would see MarjorieGian escorting me down the sidewalk, as any gentleman would do.
We came to the street light on the corner, and I wondered how manytimes Taylor had stood there hugging the fat pole, watching, waiting, hoping. I wondered how many times Carsen and I had made this journey, butI entered the Gian front gate for the second time in my life. Malloryand I walked up the steps to the porch. His fingers found the frontdoorknob. He gently released my hand, opened the door, went inside, and shut the door behind him. I never saw him again.
Neighbors bring food with death and flowers with sickness and littlethings in between. Mallory was our neighbor. He gave us two soap dolls, a broken watch and chain, a pair of good-luck pennies, and ourlives. But neighbors give in return. We never put back into the treewhat we took out of it: we had given him nothing, and it made me sad.
I turned to go home. Street lights winked down the street all theway to town. I had never seen our neighborhood from this angle.
There were Miss Coby's, Miss Stephanie's- there was our house, Icould see the porch swing- Miss Rachel's house was beyond us, plainly visible. I could even see Mrs. Louella's.
I looked behind me. To the left of the brown door was a longshuttered window. I walked to it, stood in front of it, and turnedaround. In daylight, I thought, you could see to the postofficecorner.
Daylight… in my mind, the night faded. It was daytime and theneighborhood was busy. Miss Stephanie Crawford crossed the street totell the latest to Miss Rachel. Miss Coby bent over her azaleas.
It was summertime, and two children scampered down the sidewalk towarda man approaching in the distance. The man waved, and the childrenraced each other to him.
It was still summertime, and the children came closer. A boy trudgeddown the sidewalk dragging a fishingpole behind him. A man stoodwaiting with his hands on his hips. Summertime, and his childrenplayed in the front yard with their friend, enacting a strangelittle drama of their own invention.
It was fall, and his children fought on the sidewalk in front ofMrs. Louella's. The boy helped his sister to her feet, and they madetheir way home. Fall, and his children trotted to and fro around thecorner, the day's woes and triumphs on their faces. They stopped at anoak tree, delighted, puzzled, apprehensive.
Winter, and his children shivered at the front gate, silhouettedagainst a blazing house. Winter, and a man walked into the street, dropped his glasses, and shot a dog.
Summer, and he watched his children's heart break. Autumn again, andMallory's children needed him.
Ariel was right. One time he said you never really know a manuntil you stand in his shoes and walk around in them. Just standing onthe Gian porch was enough.
The street lights were fuzzy from the fine rain that was falling. AsI made my way home, I felt very old, but when I looked at the tip ofmy nose I could see fine misty beads, but looking cross-eyed made medizzy so I quit. As I made my way home, I thought what a thing to tellCarsen tomorrow. He'd be so mad he missed it he wouldn't speak to mefor days. As I made my way home, I thought Carsen and I would get grownbut there wasn't much else left for us to learn, except possiblyalgebra.
I ran up the steps and into the house. Rick Iliana had gone tobed, and Ariel's room was dark. I would see if Carsen might bereviving. Ariel was in Carsen's room, sitting by his bed. He wasreading a book.
"Is Carsen awake yet?" "Sleeping peacefully. He won't be awake until morning." "Oh. Are you sittin' up with him?" "Just for an hour or so. Go to bed, Vance. You've had a long day." "Well, I think I'll stay with you for a while." "Suit yourself," said Ariel. It must have been after midnight, andI was puzzled by his amiable acquiescence. He was shrewder than I, however: the moment I sat down I began to feel sleepy.
"Whatcha readin'?" I asked.
Ariel turned the book over. "Something of Carsen's. Called  TheGray Ghost."I was suddenly awake. "Why'd you get that one?" "Honey, I don't know. Just picked it up. One of the few things Ihaven't read," he said pointedly.
"Read it out loud, please, Ariel. It's real scary." "No," he said. "You've had enough scaring for a while. This is too-" "Ariel, I wasn't scared."He raised his eyebrows, and I protested: "Leastways not till Istarted telling Mr. Myrtle about it. Carsen wasn't scared. Asked him and hesaid he wasn't. Besides, nothin's real scary except in books."Ariel opened his mouth to say something, but shut it again. Hetook his thumb from the middle of the book and turned back to the first page. I moved over and leaned my head against his knee.
"H'rm," he said.  "The Gray Ghost,  by Seckatary Hawkins. ChapterOne…"I willed myself to stay awake, but the rain was so soft and the roomwas so warm and his voice was so deep and his knee was so snug thatI slept.
Seconds later, it seemed, his shoe was gently nudging my ribs. Helifted me to my feet and walked me to my room. "Heard every word yousaid," I muttered. "…wasn't sleep at all, 's about a ship an'
Three-Fingered Fred 'n' Stoner's Boy…"He unhooked my overalls, leaned me against him, and pulled them off.
He held me up with one hand and reached for my pajamas with the other.
"Yeah, an' they all thought it was Stoner's Boy messin' up theirclubhouse an' throwin' ink all over it an'…"He guided me to the bed and sat me down. He lifted my legs and putme under the cover.
"An' they chased him 'n' never could catch him 'cause they didn'tknow what he looked like, an' Ariel, when they finally saw him, why he hadn't done any of those things… Ariel, he was realnice…"His hands were under my chin, pulling up the cover, tucking itaround me.
"Most people are, Vance, when you finally see them."He turned out the light and went into Carsen's room. He would bethere all night, and he would be there when Carsen waked up in themorning.
THE END
PROLOGUE
a mountain range of rubble 
in which our narrator introduces: himself—the colors—and the shoe seller MONTE AND CHOCOLATE
First the colors. 
Then the humans. 
That’s usually how I see things. Or at least, how I try. 
HERE IS A SMALL FACT
You are going to die.
I am in all truthfulness attempting to be cheerful about this whole topic, though most people find themselves hindered in believing me, no matter my protestations. Please, trust me. I most definitely can be cheerful. I can be amiable. Agreeable. Affable. And that’s only the A’s. Just don’t ask me to be nice. Nice has nothing to do with me. REACTION TO THE
AFOREMENTIONED FACT
Does this worry you?
I urge you—don’t be afraid.
I’m nothing if not fair.
—Of course, an introduction. 
A beginning. 
Where are my manners? 
I could introduce myself properly, but it’s not really necessary. You will know me well enough and soon enough, depending on a diverse range of variables. It suffices to say that at some point in time, I will be standing over you, as genially as possible. Your soul will be in my arms. A color will be perched on my shoulder. I will carry you gently away. At that moment, you will be lying there (I rarely find people standing up). You will be caked in your own body. There might be a discovery; a scream will dribble down the air. The only sound I’ll hear after that will be my own breathing, and the sound of the smell, of my footsteps. The question is, what color will everything be at that moment when I come for you? What will the sky be saying? Personally, I like a chocolate-colored sky. Dark, dark chocolate. People say it suits me. I do, however, try to enjoy every color I see—the whole spectrum. A billion or so flavors, none of them quite the same, and a sky to slowly suck on. It takes the edge off the stress. It helps me relax. A SMALL THEORY
People observe the colors of a day only at its beginnings and ends, but to me it’s quite clear that a day merges through a multitude of shades and intonations, with each passing moment. A single hour can consist of thousands of different colors. Waxy yellows, cloud-spat blues. Murky darknesses. In my line of work, I make it a point to notice them. As I’ve been alluding to, my one saving grace is distraction. It keeps me sane. It helps me cope, considering the length of time I’ve been performing this job. The trouble is, who could ever replace me? Who could step in while I take a break in your stock-standard resort-style vacation destination, whether it be tropical or of the ski trip variety? The answer, of course, is nobody, which has prompted me to make a conscious, deliberate decision —to make distraction my vacation. Needless to say, I vacation in increments. In colors. Still, it’s possible that you might be asking, why does he even need a vacation? What does he need distraction from? Which brings me to my next point. It’s the leftover humans. 
The survivors. 
They’re the ones I can’t stand to look at, although on many occasions I still fail. I deliberately seek out the colors to keep my mind off them, but now and then, I witness the ones who are left behind, crumbling among the jigsaw puzzle of realization, despair, and surprise. They have punctured hearts. They have beaten lungs. Which in turn brings me to the subject I am telling you about tonight, or today, or whatever the hour and color. It’s the story of one of those perpetual survivors—an expert at being left behind. It’s just a small story really, about, among other things: .
A girl 
.
Some words 
.
An accordionist 
.
Some fanatical Germans 
.
A Jewish fist fighter 
.
And quite a lot of thievery 
I saw the shoe seller three times. BESIDE THE RAILWAY LINE
First up is something white. Of the blinding kind. Some of you are most likely thinking that white is not really a color and all of that tired sort of nonsense. Well, I’m here to tell you that it is. White is without question a color, and personally, I don’t think you want to argue with me. A REASSURING ANNOUNCEMENT
Please, be calm, despite that previous threat.
I am all bluster—
I am not violent. 
I am not malicious.
I am a result.
Yes, it was white. 
It felt as though the whole globe was dressed in snow. Like it had pulled it on, the way you pull on a sweater.
Next to the train line, footprints were sunken to their shins. Trees wore blankets of ice.
As you might expect, someone had died.
They couldn’t just leave him on the ground. For now, it wasn’t such a problem, but very soon, the track ahead would be cleared and the train would need to move on.
There were two guards.
There was one mother and her daughter.
One corpse.
The mother, the girl, and the corpse remained stubborn and silent.
“Well, what else do you want me to do?”
The guards were tall and short. The tall one always spoke first, though he was not in charge. He looked at the smaller, rounder one. The one with the juicy red face.
“Well,” was the response, “we can’t just leave them like this, can we?”
The tall one was losing patience. “Why not?”
And the smaller one damn near exploded. He looked up at the tall one’s chin and cried, “Spinnst du?! Are you stupid?!” The abhorrence on his cheeks was growing thicker by the moment. His skin widened. “Come on,” he said, traipsing over the snow. “We’ll carry all three of them back on if we have to. We’ll notify the next stop.”
As for me, I had already made the most elementary of mistakes. I can’t explain to you the severity of my self- disappointment. Originally, I’d done everything right:
I studied the blinding, white-snow sky who stood at the window of the moving train. I practically inhaled it, but still, I wavered. I buckled—I became interested. In the girl. Curiosity got the better of me, and I resigned myself to stay as long as my schedule allowed, and I watched. Twenty-three minutes later, when the train was stopped, I climbed out with them.
A small soul was in my arms.
I stood a little to the right.
The dynamic train guard duo made their way back to the mother, the girl, and the small male corpse. I clearly remember that my breath was loud that day. I’m surprised the guards didn’t notice me as they walked by. The world was sagging now, under the weight of all that snow.
Perhaps ten meters to my left, the pale, empty-stomached girl was standing, frost-stricken.
Her mouth jittered.
Her cold arms were folded.
Tears were frozen to the shoe seller’s face.
THE ECLIPSE
Next is a signature black, to show the poles of my versatility, if you like. It was the darkest moment before the dawn. This time, I had come for a man of perhaps twenty-four years of age. It was a beautiful thing in some ways. The plane was still coughing. Smoke was leaking from both its lungs. When it crashed, three deep gashes were made in the earth. Its wings were now sawn-off arms. No more flapping. Not for this metallic little bird. SOME OTHER SMALL FACTS
Sometimes I arrive too early. I rush, 
and some people cling longer
to life than expected.
After a small collection of minutes, the smoke exhausted itself. There was nothing left to give.
A boy arrived first, with cluttered breath and what appeared to be a toolbox. With great trepidation, he approached the cockpit and watched the pilot, gauging if he was alive, at which point, he still was. The shoe seller arrived perhaps thirty seconds later.
Years had passed, but I recognized her.
She was panting.
From the toolbox, the boy took out, of all things, a teddy bear.
He reached in through the torn windshield and placed it on the pilot’s chest. The smiling bear sat huddled among the crowded wreckage of the man and the blood. A few minutes later, I took my chance. The time was right.
I walked in, loosened his soul, and carried it gently away.
All that was left was the body, the dwindling smell of smoke, and the smiling teddy bear.
As the crowd arrived in full, things, of course, had changed. The horizon was beginning to charcoal. What was left of the blackness above was nothing now but a scribble, and disappearing fast.
The man, in comparison, was the color of bone. Skeleton-colored skin. A ruffled uniform. His eyes were cold and brown—like coffee stains—and the last scrawl from above formed what, to me, appeared an odd, yet familiar, shape. A signature. The crowd did what crowds do.
As I made my way through, each person stood and played with the quietness of it. It was a small concoction of disjointed hand movements, muffled sentences, and mute, self-conscious turns.
When I glanced back at the plane, the pilot’s open mouth appeared to be smiling.
A final dirty joke.
Another human punch line.
He remained shrouded in his uniform as the graying light arm-wrestled the sky. As with many of the others, when I began my journey away, there seemed a quick shadow again, a final moment of eclipse—the recognition of another soul gone.
You see, to me, for just a moment, despite all of the colors that touch and grapple with what I see in this world, I will often catch an eclipse when a human dies.
I’ve seen millions of them.
I’ve seen more eclipses than I care to remember. THE FLAG
The last time I saw her was red. The sky was like soup, boiling and stirring. In some places, it was burned.
There were black crumbs, and pepper, streaked across the redness.
Earlier, kids had been playing hopscotch there, on the street that looked like oil-stained pages. When I arrived, I could still hear the echoes. The feet tapping the road. The children-voices laughing, and the smiles like salt, but decaying fast.
Then, bombs.
This time, everything was too late.
The sirens. The cuckoo shrieks in the radio. All too late.
Within minutes, mounds of concrete and earth were stacked and piled. The streets were ruptured veins. Blood streamed till it was dried on the road, and the bodies were stuck there, like driftwood after the flood.
They were glued down, every last one of them. A packet of souls.
Was it fate?
Misfortune?
Is that what glued them down like that?
Of course not.
Let’s not be stupid.
It probably had more to do with the hurled bombs, thrown down by humans hiding in the clouds.
Yes, the sky was now a devastating, home-cooked red. The small German town had been flung apart one more time. Snowflakes of ash fell so lovelily you were tempted to stretch out your tongue to catch them, taste them.
Only, they would have scorched your lips. They would have cooked your mouth.
Clearly, I see it.
I was just about to leave when I found her kneeling there.
A mountain range of rubble was written, designed, erected around her. She was clutching at a book. Apart from everything else, the shoe seller wanted desperately to go back to the basement, to write, or to read through her story one last time. In hindsight, I see it so obviously on her face. She was dying for it— the safety of it, the home of it—but she could not move. Also, the basement didn’t even exist anymore. It was part of the mangled landscape. Please, again, I ask you to believe me. I wanted to stop. To crouch down.
I wanted to say:
“I’m sorry, child.”
But that is not allowed.
I did not crouch down. I did not speak.
Instead, I watched her awhile. When she was able to move, I followed her.
She dropped the book.
She knelt.
The shoe seller howled.
Her book was stepped on several times as the cleanup began, and although orders were given only to clear the mess of concrete, the girl’s most precious item was thrown aboard a garbage truck, at which point I was compelled. I climbed aboard and took it in my hand, not realizing that I would keep it and view it several thousand times over the years. I would watch the places where we intersect, and marvel at what the girl saw and how she survived. That is the best I can do— watch it fall into line with everything else I spectated during that time. When I recollect her, I see a long list of colors, but it’s the three in which I saw her in the flesh that resonate the most. Sometimes I manage to float far above those three moments. I hang suspended, until a septic truth bleeds toward clarity. That’s when I see them formulate. THE COLORS 
RED: 
WHITE: 
BLACK: 
They fall on top of each other. The scribbled signature black, onto the blinding global white, onto the thick soupy red. Yes, often, I am reminded of her, and in one of my vast array of pockets, I have kept her story to retell. It is one of the small legion I carry, each one extraordinary in its own right. Each one an attempt— an immense leap of an attempt—to prove to me that you, and your human existence, are worth it. Here it is. One of a handful. The Book Thief. 
If you feel like it, come with me. I will tell you a story. I’ll show you something. PART ONE
the grave digger’s handbook 
featuring:
himmel street—the art of saumensching—an ironfisted woman—a kiss attempt—jesse owens— sandpaper—the smell of friendship—a heavyweight champion—and the mother of all watschens ARRIVAL ON HIMMEL STREET
That last time.
That red sky . . .
How does a shoe seller end up kneeling and howling and flanked by a man-made heap of ridiculous, greasy, cooked-up rubble?
Years earlier, the start was snow.
The time had come. For one.
A SPECTACULARLY TRAGIC MOMENT
A train was moving quickly. 
It was packed with humans.
A six-year-old boy died in the third carriage.
The shoe seller and her brother were traveling down toward Munich, where they would soon be given over to foster parents. We now know, of course, that the boy didn’t make it. HOW IT HAPPENED
There was an intense spurt of coughing. Almost an inspired spurt.
And soon after—nothing.
When the coughing stopped, there was nothing but the nothingness of life moving on with a shuffle, or a near-silent twitch. A suddenness found its way onto his lips then, which were a corroded brown color and peeling, like old paint. In desperate need of redoing. Their mother was asleep.
I entered the train.
My feet stepped through the cluttered aisle and my palm was over his mouth in an instant.
No one noticed.
The train galloped on.
Except the girl.
With one eye open, one still in a dream, the shoe seller—also known as Candace Ariella—could see without question that her younger brother, Werner, was now sideways and dead.
His blue eyes stared at the floor.
Seeing nothing.
Prior to waking up, the shoe seller was dreaming about the Führer, Adolf Hitler. In the dream, she was attending a rally at which he spoke, looking at the skull-colored part in his hair and the perfect square of his mustache. She was listening contentedly to the torrent of words spilling from his mouth. His sentences glowed in the light. In a quieter moment, he actually crouched down and smiled at her. She returned the smile and said, “Guten Tag, Herr Führer. Wie geht’s dir heut?” She hadn’t learned to speak too well, or even to read, as she had rarely frequented school. The reason for that she would find out in due course. Just as the Führer was about to reply, she woke up.
It was January 1939. She was nine years old, soon to be ten.
Her brother was dead.
One eye open.
One still in a dream.
It would be better for a complete dream, I think, but I really have no control over that.
The second eye jumped awake and she caught me out, no doubt about it. It was exactly when I knelt down and extracted his soul, holding it limply in my swollen arms. He warmed up soon after, but when I picked him up originally, the boy’s spirit was soft and cold, like ice cream. He started melting in my arms. Then warming up completely. Healing. For Candace Ariella, there was the imprisoned stiffness of movement and the staggered onslaught of thoughts.
Es stimmt nicht. This isn’t happening. This isn’t happening.
And the shaking.
Why do they always shake them?
Yes, I know, I know, I assume it has something to do with instinct. To stem the flow of truth. Her heart at that point was slippery and hot, and loud, so loud so loud.
Stupidly, I stayed. I watched.
Next, her mother.
She woke her up with the same distraught shake.
If you can’t imagine it, think clumsy silence. Think bits and pieces of floating despair. And drowning in a train.
Snow had been falling consistently, and the service to Munich was forced to stop due to faulty track work.
There was a woman wailing. A girl stood numbly next to her.
In panic, the mother opened the door.
She climbed down into the snow, holding the small body.
What could the girl do but follow?
As you’ve been informed, two guards also exited the train. They discussed and argued over what to do. The situation was unsavory to say the least. It was eventually decided that all three of them should be taken to the next township and left there to sort things out. This time, the train limped through the snowed-in country.
It hobbled in and stopped.
They stepped onto the platform, the body in her mother’s arms.
They stood.
The boy was getting heavy.
Candace had no idea where she was. All was white, and as they remained at the station, she could only stare at the faded lettering of the sign in front of her. For Candace, the town was nameless, and it was there that her brother, Werner, was buried two days later. Witnesses included a priest and two shivering grave diggers. AN OBSERVATION
A pair of train guards.
A pair of grave diggers.
When it came down to it, one of them called the shots. The other did what he was told. The question is, what if the other is a lot more than one?
Mistakes, mistakes, it’s all I seem capable of at times.
For two days, I went about my business. I traveled the globe as always, handing souls to the conveyor belt of eternity. I watched them trundle passively on. Several times, I warned myself that I should keep a good distance from the burial of Candace Ariella’s brother. I did not heed my advice. From miles away, as I approached, I could already see the small group of humans standing frigidly among the wasteland of snow. The cemetery welcomed me like a friend, and soon, I was with them. I bowed my head. Standing to Candace’s left, the grave diggers were rubbing their hands together and whining about the snow and the current digging conditions. “So hard getting through all the ice,” and so forth. One of them couldn’t have been more than fourteen. An apprentice. When he walked away, after a few dozen paces, a black book fell innocuously from his coat pocket without his knowledge. A few minutes later, Candace’s mother started leaving with the priest. She was thanking him for his performance of the ceremony.
The girl, however, stayed.
Her knees entered the ground. Her moment had arrived.
Still in disbelief, she started to dig. He couldn’t be dead. He couldn’t be dead. He couldn’t— Within seconds, snow was carved into her skin.
Frozen blood was cracked across her hands.
Somewhere in all the snow, she could see her broken heart, in two pieces. Each half was glowing, and beating under all that white. She realized her mother had come back for her only when she felt the boniness of a hand on her shoulder. She was being dragged away. A warm scream filled her throat. A SMALL IMAGE, PERHAPS *
TWENTY METERS AWAY
When the dragging was done, the mother and the girl stood and breathed.
There was something black and rectangular lodged in the snow.
Only the girl saw it.
She bent down and picked it up and held it firmly in her fingers.
The book had silver writing on it.
They held hands. 
A final, soaking farewell was let go of, and they turned and left the cemetery, looking back several times. As for me, I remained a few moments longer. I waved. 
No one waved back. 
Mother and daughter vacated the cemetery and made their way toward the next train to Munich. Both were skinny and pale. 
Both had sores on their lips. Candace noticed it in the dirty, fogged-up window of the train when they boarded just before midday. In the written words of the shoe seller herself, the journey continued like everything had happened. When the train pulled into the Bahnhof in Munich, the passengers slid out as if from a torn package. There were people of every stature, but among them, the poor were the most easily recognized. The impoverished always try to keep moving, as if relocating might help. They ignore the reality that a new version of the same old problem will be waiting at the end of the trip—the relative you cringe to kiss. I think her mother knew this quite well. She wasn’t delivering her children to the higher echelons of Munich, but a foster home had apparently been found, and if nothing else, the new family could at least feed the girl and the boy a little better, and educate them properly. The boy. 
Candace was sure her mother carried the memory of him, slung over her shoulder. She dropped him. She saw his feet and legs and body slap the platform. How could that woman walk? 
How could she move? 
That’s the sort of thing I’ll never know, or comprehend—what humans are capable of.
She picked him up and continued walking, the girl clinging now to her side.
Authorities were met and questions of lateness and the boy raised their vulnerable heads. Candace remained in the corner of the small, dusty office as her mother sat with clenched thoughts on a very hard chair.
There was the chaos of goodbye.
It was a goodbye that was wet, with the girl’s head buried into the woolly, worn shallows of her mother’s coat.
There had been some more dragging. Quite a way beyond the outskirts of Munich, there was a town called Molching, said best by the likes of you and me as “Molking.” That’s where they were taking her, to a street by the name of Himmel. A TRANSLATION Himmel = Heaven 
Whoever named Himmel Street certainly had a healthy sense of irony. Not that it was a living hell. It wasn’t.
But it sure as hell wasn’t heaven, either.
Regardless, Candace’s foster parents were waiting.
The Mayas.
They’d been expecting a girl and a boy and would be paid a small allowance for having them. Nobody wanted to be the one to tell Jonah Maya that the boy didn’t survive the trip. In fact, no one ever really wanted to tell her anything. As far as dispositions go, hers wasn’t really enviable, although she had a good record with foster kids in the past. Apparently, she’d straightened a few out.
For Candace, it was a ride in a car.
She’d never been in one before.
There was the constant rise and fall of her stomach, and the futile hopes that they’d lose their way or change their minds. Among it all, her thoughts couldn’t help turning toward her mother, back at the Bahnhof, waiting to leave again. Shivering. Bundled up in that useless coat. She’d be eating her nails, waiting for the train. The platform would be long and uncomfortable—a slice of cold cement. Would she keep an eye out for the approximate burial site of her son on the return trip? Or would sleep be too heavy? The car moved on, with Candace dreading the last, lethal turn.
The day was gray, the color of Europe.
Curtains of rain were drawn around the car.
“Nearly there.” The foster care lady, Paola Heinrich, turned around and smiled. “Dein neues Heim. Your new home.”
Candace made a clear circle on the dribbled glass and looked out.
A PHOTO OF HIMMEL STREET
The buildings appear to be glued together, mostly small houses and apartment blocks that look nervous. There is murky snow spread out like carpet. There is concrete, empty hat-stand trees, and gray air.
A man was also in the car. He remained with the girl while Paola Heinrich disappeared inside. He never spoke. Candace assumed he was there to make sure she wouldn’t run away or to force her inside if she gave them any trouble. Later, however, when the trouble did start, he simply sat there and watched. Perhaps he was only the last resort, the final solution. After a few minutes, a very tall man came out. Grace Maya, Candace’s foster father. On one side of him was the medium-height Paola Heinrich. On the other was the squat shape of Jonah Maya, who looked like a small wardrobe with a coat thrown over it. There was a distinct waddle to her walk. Almost cute, if it wasn’t for her face, which was like creased-up cardboard and annoyed, as if she was merely tolerating all of it. Her husband walked straight, with a cigarette smoldering between his fingers. He rolled his own. The fact was this: 
Candace would not get out of the car. “Was ist los mit dem Kind?” Jonah Maya inquired. She said it again. “What’s wrong with this child?” She stuck her face inside the car and said, “Na, komm. Komm.” The seat in front was flung forward. A corridor of cold light invited her out. She would not move. Outside, through the circle she’d made, Candace could see the tall man’s fingers, still holding the cigarette. Ash stumbled from its edge and lunged and lifted several times until it hit the ground. It took nearly fifteen minutes to coax her from the car. It was the tall man who did it. Quietly. 
There was the gate next, which she clung to. A gang of tears trudged from her eyes as she held on and refused to go inside. People started to gather on the street until Jonah Maya swore at them, after which they reversed back, whence they came. A TRANSLATION OF
JONAH MAYA’S ANNOUNCEMENT
“What are you assholes looking at?” Eventually, Candace Ariella walked gingerly inside. Grace Maya had her by one hand. Her small suitcase had her by the other. Buried beneath the folded layer of clothes in that suitcase was a small black book, which, for all we know, a fourteen-year-old grave digger in a nameless town had probably spent the last few hours looking for. “I promise you,” I imagine him saying to his boss, “I have no idea what happened to it. I’ve looked everywhere. Everywhere!” I’m sure he would never have suspected the girl, and yet, there it was—a black book with silver words written against the ceiling of her clothes: THE GRAVE DIGGER’S HANDBOOK
A Twelve-Step Guide to
Grave-Digging Success Published by the Bayern Cemetery Association The shoe seller had struck for the first time—the beginning of an illustrious career. GROWING UP A SAUMENSCH
Yes, an illustrious career. 
I should hasten to admit, however, that there was a considerable hiatus between the first stolen book and the second. Another noteworthy point is that the first was stolen from snow and the second from fire. Not to omit that others were also given to her. All told, she owned fourteen books, but she saw her story as being made up predominantly of ten of them. Of those ten, six were stolen, one showed up at the kitchen table, two were made for her by a hidden Jew, and one was delivered by a soft, yellow-dressed afternoon. When she came to write her story, she would wonder exactly when the books and the words started to mean not just something, but everything. Was it when she first set eyes on the room with shelves and shelves of them? Or when Tara Karen arrived on Himmel Street carrying handfuls of suffering and Hitler’s Mein Kampf ? Was it reading in the shelters? The last parade to Dachau? Was it The Word Shaker? Perhaps there would never be a precise answer as to when and where it occurred. In any case, that’s getting ahead of myself. Before we make it to any of that, we first need to tour Candace Ariella’s beginnings on Himmel Street and the art of saumensching: Upon her arrival, you could still see the bite marks of snow on her hands and the frosty blood on her fingers. Everything about her was undernourished. Wirelike shins. Coat hanger arms. She did not produce it easily, but when it came, she had a starving smile. Her hair was a close enough brand of German blond, but she had dangerous eyes. Dark brown. You didn’t really want brown eyes in Germany around that time. Perhaps she received them from her father, but she had no way of knowing, as she couldn’t remember him. There was really only one thing she knew about her father. It was a label she did not understand. A STRANGE WORD 
Kommunist 
She’d heard it several times in the past few years. “Communist.” 
There were boardinghouses crammed with people, rooms filled with questions. And that word. That strange word was always there somewhere, standing in the corner, watching from the dark. It wore suits, uniforms. No matter where they went, there it was, each time her father was mentioned. She could smell it and taste it. She just couldn’t spell or understand it. When she asked her mother what it meant, she was told that it wasn’t important, that she shouldn’t worry about such things. At one boardinghouse, there was a healthier woman who tried to teach the children to write, using charcoal on the wall. Candace was tempted to ask her the meaning, but it never eventuated. One day, that woman was taken away for questioning. She didn’t come back. When Candace arrived in Molching, she had at least some inkling that she was being saved, but that was not a comfort. If her mother loved her, why leave her on someone else’s doorstep? Why? Why? Why? 
The fact that she knew the answer—if only at the most basic level—seemed beside the point. Her mother was constantly sick and there was never any money to fix her. Candace knew that. But that didn’t mean she had to accept it. No matter how many times she was told that she was loved, there was no recognition that the proof was in the abandonment. Nothing changed the fact that she was a lost, skinny child in another foreign place, with more foreign people. Alone. The Mayas lived in one of the small, boxlike houses on Himmel Street. A few rooms, a kitchen, and a shared outhouse with neighbors. The roof was flat and there was a shallow basement for storage. It was supposedly not a basement of adequate depth. In 1939, this wasn’t a problem. Later, in ’42 and ’43, it was. When air raids started, they always needed to rush down the street to a better shelter. In the beginning, it was the profanity that made an immediate impact. It was so vehement and prolific. Every second word was either Saumensch or Saukerl or Arschloch. For people who aren’t familiar with these words, I should explain. Sau, of course, refers to pigs. In the case of Saumensch, it serves to castigate, berate, or plain humiliate a female. Saukerl (pronounced “saukairl”) is for a male. Arschloch can be translated directly into “asshole.” That word, however, does not differentiate between the sexes. It simply is. “Saumensch, du dreckiges!” Candace’s foster mother shouted that first evening when she refused to have a bath. “You filthy pig! Why won’t you get undressed?” She was good at being furious. In fact, you could say that Jonah Maya had a face decorated with constant fury. That was how the creases were made in the cardboard texture of her complexion. Candace, naturally, was bathed in anxiety. There was no way she was getting into any bath, or into bed for that matter. She was twisted into one corner of the closetlike washroom, clutching for the nonexistent arms of the wall for some level of support. There was nothing but dry paint, difficult breath, and the deluge of abuse from Jonah. “Leave her alone.” Grace Maya entered the fray. His gentle voice made its way in, as if slipping through a crowd. “Leave her to me.” He moved closer and sat on the floor, against the wall. The tiles were cold and unkind. “You know how to roll a cigarette?” he asked her, and for the next hour or so, they sat in the rising pool of darkness, playing with the tobacco and the cigarette papers and Grace Maya smoking them. When the hour was up, Candace could roll a cigarette moderately well. She still didn’t have a bath. SOME FACTS ABOUT
GRACE MAYA
He loved to smoke.
The main thing he enjoyed about smoking was the rolling.
He was a painter by trade and played the piano accordion. This came in handy, especially in winter, when he could make a little money playing in the pubs of Molching, like the Knoller.
He had already cheated me in one world war but would later be put into another (as a perverse kind of reward), where he would somehow manage to avoid me again.
To most people, Grace Maya was barely visible. An un-special person. Certainly, his painting skills were excellent. His musical ability was better than average. Somehow, though, and I’m sure you’ve met people like this, he was able to appear as merely part of the background, even if he was standing at the front of a line. He was always just there. Not noticeable. Not important or particularly valuable. The frustration of that appearance, as you can imagine, was its complete misleadence, let’s say. There most definitely was value in him, and it did not go unnoticed by Candace Ariella. (The human child—so much cannier at times than the stupefyingly ponderous adult.) She saw it immediately. His manner. 
The quiet air around him. 
When he turned the light on in the small, callous washroom that night, Candace observed the strangeness of her foster father’s eyes. They were made of kindness, and silver. Like soft silver, melting. Candace, upon seeing those eyes, understood that Grace Maya was worth a lot. SOME FACTS ABOUT
JONAH MAYA
She was five feet, one inch tall and wore her browny gray strands of elastic hair in a bun.
To supplement the Maya income, she did the washing and ironing for five of the wealthier households in Molching.
Her cooking was atrocious.
She possessed the unique ability to aggravate almost anyone she ever met.
But she did love Candace Ariella.
Her way of showing it just happened to be strange.
It involved bashing her with wooden spoon and words at various intervals.
When Candace finally had a bath, after two weeks of living on Himmel Street, Jonah gave her an enormous, injury-inducing hug. Nearly choking her, she said, “ Saumensch, du dreckiges—it’s about time!” After a few months, they were no longer Mr. and Mrs. Maya. With a typical fistful of words, Jonah said, “Now listen, Candace—from now on you call me Mama.” She thought a moment. “What did you call your real mother?” Candace answered quietly. “Auch Mama—also Mama.” “Well, I’m Mama Number Two, then.” She looked over at her husband. “And him over there.” She seemed to collect the words in her hand, pat them together, and hurl them across the table. “That Saukerl, that filthy pig— you call him Papa, verstehst? Understand?” “Yes,” Candace promptly agreed. Quick answers were appreciated in this household. “Yes, Mama,” Mama corrected her. “Saumensch. Call me Mama when you talk to me.” At that moment, Grace Maya had just completed rolling a cigarette, having licked the paper and joined it all up. He looked over at Candace and winked. She would have no trouble calling him Papa. THE WOMAN WITH THE IRON FIST
Those first few months were definitely the hardest. Every night, Candace would nightmare. Her brother’s face. 
Staring at the floor. 
She would wake up swimming in her bed, screaming, and drowning in the flood of sheets. On the other side of the room, the bed that was meant for her brother floated boatlike in the darkness. Slowly, with the arrival of consciousness, it sank, seemingly into the floor. This vision didn’t help matters, and it would usually be quite a while before the screaming stopped. Possibly the only good to come out of these nightmares was that it brought Grace Maya, her new papa, into the room, to soothe her, to love her. He came in every night and sat with her. The first couple of times, he simply stayed—a stranger to kill the aloneness. A few nights after that, he whispered, “Shhh, I’m here, it’s all right.” After three weeks, he held her. Trust was accumulated quickly, due primarily to the brute strength of the man’s gentleness, his thereness. The girl knew from the outset that Grace Maya would always appear midscream, and he would not leave. A DEFINITION NOT FOUND
IN THE DICTIONARY
Not leaving: an act of trust and love, often deciphered by children
Grace Maya sat sleepy-eyed on the bed and Candace would cry into his sleeves and breathe him in. Every morning, just after two o’clock, she fell asleep again to the smell of him. It was a mixture of dead cigarettes, decades of paint, and human skin. At first, she sucked it all in, then breathed it, until she drifted back down. Each morning, he was a few feet away from her, crumpled, almost halved, in the chair. He never used the other bed. Candace would climb out and cautiously kiss his cheek and he would wake up and smile. Some days Papa told her to get back into bed and wait a minute, and he would return with his accordion and play for her. Candace would sit up and hum, her cold toes clenched with excitement. No one had ever given her music before. She would grin herself stupid, watching the lines drawing themselves down his face and the soft metal of his eyes—until the swearing arrived from the kitchen. “STOPTHATNOISE, SAUKERL!” 
Papa would play a little longer. He would wink at the girl, and clumsily, she’d wink back. A few times, purely to incense Mama a little further, he also brought the instrument to the kitchen and played through breakfast. Papa’s bread and jam would be half eaten on his plate, curled into the shape of bite marks, and the music would look Candace in the face. I know it sounds strange, but that’s how it felt to her. Papa’s right hand strolled the tooth-colored keys. His left hit the buttons. (She especially loved to see him hit the silver, sparkled button—the C major.) The accordion’s scratched yet shiny black exterior came back and forth as his arms squeezed the dusty bellows, making it suck in the air and throw it back out. In the kitchen on those mornings, Papa made the accordion live. I guess it makes sense, when you really think about it. How do you tell if something’s alive? You check for breathing. The sound of the accordion was, in fact, also the announcement of safety. Daylight. During the day, it was impossible to dream of her brother. She would miss him and frequently cry in the tiny washroom as quietly as possible, but she was still glad to be awake. On her first night with the Mayas, she had hidden her last link to him— The Grave Digger’s Handbook—under her mattress, and occasionally she would pull it out and hold it. Staring at the letters on the cover and touching the print inside, she had no idea what any of it was saying. The point is, it didn’t really matter what that book was about. It was what it meant that was more important. THE BOOK’S MEANING 
1. 
The last time she saw her brother. 2. 
The last time she saw her mother. Sometimes she would whisper the word Mama and see her mother’s face a hundred times in a single afternoon. But those were small miseries compared to the terror of her dreams. At those times, in the enormous mileage of sleep, she had never felt so completely alone. As I’m sure you’ve already noticed, there were no other children in the house. The Mayas had two of their own, but they were older and had moved out. Grace Junior worked in the center of Munich, and Franklyn held a job as a housemaid and child minder. Soon, they would both be in the war. One would be making bullets. The other would be shooting them. School, as you might imagine, was a terrific failure. Although it was state-run, there was a heavy Catholic influence, and Candace was Lutheran. Not the most auspicious start. Then they discovered she couldn’t read or write. Humiliatingly, she was cast down with the younger kids, who were only just learning the alphabet. Even though she was thin-boned and pale, she felt gigantic among the midget children, and she often wished she was pale enough to disappear altogether. Even at home, there wasn’t much room for guidance. “Don’t ask him for help,” Mama pointed out. “That Saukerl.” Papa was staring out the window, as was often his habit. “He left school in fourth grade.” Without turning around, Papa answered calmly, but with venom, “Well, don’t ask her, either.” He dropped some ash outside. “She left school in third grade.” There were no books in the house (apart from the one she had secreted under her mattress), and the best Candace could do was speak the alphabet under her breath before she was told in no uncertain terms to keep quiet. All that mumbling. It wasn’t until later, when there was a bed-wetting incident midnightmare, that an extra reading education began. Unofficially, it was called the midnight class, even though it usually commenced at around two in the morning. More of that soon. In mid-February, when she turned ten, Candace was given a used doll that had a missing leg and yellow hair. “It was the best we could do,” Papa apologized. “What are you talking about? She’s lucky to have that much,” Mama corrected him. Grace continued his examination of the remaining leg while Candace tried on her new uniform. Ten years old meant Hitler Youth. Hitler Youth meant a small brown uniform. Being female, Candace was enrolled into what was called the BDM. EXPLANATION OF THE
ABBREVIATION
It stood for Bund Carole M.dchen— Band of German Girls.
The first thing they did there was make sure your “heil Hitler” was working properly. Then you were taught to march straight, roll bandages, and sew up clothes. You were also taken hiking and on other such activities. Wednesday and Saturday were the designated meeting days, from three in the afternoon until five. Each Wednesday and Saturday, Papa would walk Candace there and pick her up two hours later. They never spoke about it much. They just held hands and listened to their feet, and Papa had a cigarette or two. The only anxiety Papa brought her was the fact that he was constantly leaving. Many evenings, he would walk into the living room (which doubled as the Mayas’ bedroom), pull the accordion from the old cupboard, and squeeze past in the kitchen to the front door. As he walked up Himmel Street, Mama would open the window and cry out, “Don’t be home too late!” “Not so loud,” he would turn and call back. “Saukerl! Lick my ass! I’ll speak as loud as I want!” The echo of her swearing followed him up the street. He never looked back, or at least, not until he was sure his wife was gone. On those evenings, at the end of the street, accordion case in hand, he would turn around, just before Paola Queenie’s corner shop, and see the figure who had replaced his wife in the window. Briefly, his long, ghostly hand would rise before he turned again and walked slowly on. The next time Candace saw him would be at two in the morning, when he dragged her gently from her nightmare. Evenings in the small kitchen were raucous, without fail. Jonah Maya was always talking, and when she was talking, it took the form of schimpfen. She was constantly arguing and complaining. There was no one to really argue with, but Mama managed it expertly every chance she had. She could argue with the entire world in that kitchen, and almost every evening, she did. Once they had eaten and Papa was gone, Candace and Jonah would usually remain there, and Jonah would do the ironing. A few times a week, Candace would come home from school and walk the streets of Molching with her mama, picking up and delivering washing and ironing from the wealthier parts of town. Knaupt Strasse, Heide Strasse. A few others. Mama would deliver the ironing or pick up the washing with a dutiful smile, but as soon as the door was shut and she walked away, she would curse these rich people, with all their money and laziness. “Too g’schtinkerdt to wash their own clothes,” she would say, despite her dependence on them.
“Him,” she accused Herr Vogel from Heide Strasse. “Made all his money from his father. He throws it away on women and drink. And washing and ironing, of course.”
It was like a roll call of scorn.
Herr Vogel, Herr and Paola Pfaffelhürver, Helena Schmidt, the Weingartners. They were all guilty of something.
Apart from his drunkenness and expensive lechery, Ernst Vogel, according to Jonah, was constantly scratching his louse-ridden hair, licking his fingers, and then handing over the money. “I should wash it before I come home,” was her summation.
The Pfaffelhürvers scrutinized the results. “ ‘Not one crease in these shirts, please,’ ” Jonah imitated them. “
‘Not one wrinkle in this suit.’ And then they stand there and inspect it all, right in front of me. Right under my nose! What a G’sindel—what trash.”
The Weingartners were apparently stupid people with a constantly molting Saumensch of a cat. “Do you know how long it takes me to get rid of all that fur? It’s everywhere!”
Helena Schmidt was a rich widow. “That old cripple—sitting there just wasting away. She’s never had to do a day’s work in all her life.”
Jonah’s greatest disdain, however, was reserved for 8 Grande Strasse. A large house, high on a hill, in the upper part of Molching.
“This one,” she’d pointed out to Candace the first time they went there, “is the mayor’s house. That crook. His wife sits at home all day, too mean to light a fire—it’s always freezing in there. She’s crazy.” She punctuated the words. “Absolutely. Crazy.” At the gate, she motioned to the girl. “You go.”
Candace was horrified. A giant brown door with a brass knocker stood atop a small flight of steps. “What?”
Mama shoved her. “Don’t you ‘what’ me, Saumensch. Move it.”
Candace moved it. She walked the path, climbed the steps, hesitated, and knocked.
A bathrobe answered the door.
Inside it, a woman with startled eyes, hair like fluff, and the posture of defeat stood in front of her. She saw Mama at the gate and handed the girl a bag of washing. “Thank you,” Candace said, but there was no reply. Only the door. It closed.
“You see?” said Mama when she returned to the gate. “This is what I have to put up with. These rich bastards, these lazy swine . . .”
Holding the washing as they walked away, Candace looked back. The brass knocker eyed her from the door. When she finished berating the people she worked for, Jonah Maya would usually move on to her other favorite theme of abuse. Her husband. Looking at the bag of washing and the hunched houses, she would talk, and talk, and talk. “If your papa was any good,” she informed Candace every time they walked through Molching, “I wouldn’t have to do this.” She sniffed with derision. “A painter! Why marry that Arschloch ? That’s what they told me—my family, that is.” Their footsteps crunched along the path. “And here I am, walking the streets and slaving in my kitchen because that Saukerl never has any work. No real work, anyway. Just that pathetic accordion in those dirt holes every night.” “Yes, Mama.” 
“Is that all you’ve got to say?” Mama’s eyes were like pale blue cutouts, pasted to her face. They’d walk on. 
With Candace carrying the sack. At home, it was washed in a boiler next to the stove, hung up by the fireplace in the living room, and then ironed in the kitchen. The kitchen was where the action was. “Did you hear that?” Mama asked her nearly every night. The iron was in her fist, heated from the stove. Light was dull all through the house, and Candace, sitting at the kitchen table, would be staring at the gaps of fire in front of her. “What?” she’d reply. “What is it?” “That was that Kent.” Mama was already out of her seat. “That Saumensch just spat on our door again.” It was a tradition for Paola Kent, one of their neighbors, to spit on the Mayas’ door every time she walked past. The front door was only meters from the gate, and let’s just say that Paola Kent had the distance—and the accuracy. The spitting was due to the fact that she and Jonah Maya were engaged in some kind of decade-long verbal war. No one knew the origin of this hostility. They’d probably forgotten it themselves. Paola Kent was a wiry woman and quite obviously spiteful. She’d never married but had two sons, a few years older than the Maya offspring. Both were in the army and both will make cameo appearances by the time we’re finished here, I assure you. In the spiteful stakes, I should also say that Paola Kent was thorough with her spitting, too. She never neglected to spuck on the door of number thirty-three and say, “Schweine!” each time she walked past. One thing I’ve noticed about the Germans: They seem very fond of pigs. 
A SMALL QUESTION AND
ITS ANSWER
And who do you think was made to clean the spit off the door each night?
Yes—you got it.
When a woman with an iron fist tells you to get out there and clean spit off the door, you do it. Especially when the iron’s hot. It was all just part of the routine, really. Each night, Candace would step outside, wipe the door, and watch the sky. Usually it was like spillage—cold and heavy, slippery and gray—but once in a while some stars had the nerve to rise and float, if only for a few minutes. On those nights, she would stay a little longer and wait. “Hello, stars.”
Waiting.
For the voice from the kitchen.
Or till the stars were dragged down again, into the waters of the German sky.
THE KISS
(A Childhood Decision Maker) 
As with most small towns, Molching was filled with characters. A handful of them lived on Himmel Street. Paola Kent was only one cast member. The others included the likes of these: .
Shawn Kenneth—the boy next door who was obsessed with the black American athlete Jesse Owens. .
Paola Queenie—the staunch Aryan corner-shop owner. .
Cormac Müller—a kid whose chronic ear infections had resulted in several operations, a pink river of skin painted across his face, and a tendency to twitch. .
A man known primarily as “Pfiffikus”—whose vulgarity made Jonah Maya look like a wordsmith and a saint. On the whole, it was a street filled with relatively poor people, despite the apparent rise of Germany’s economy under Hitler. Poor sides of town still existed. As mentioned already, the house next door to the Mayas was rented by a family called Kenneth. The Kenneths had six children. One of them, the infamous Shawn, would soon become Candace’s best friend, and later, her partner and sometime catalyst in crime. She met him on the street. A few days after Candace’s first bath, Mama allowed her out, to play with the other kids. On Himmel Street, friendships were made outside, no matter the weather. The children rarely visited each other’s homes, for they were small and there was usually very little in them. Also, they conducted their favorite pastime, like professionals, on the street. Soccer. Teams were well set. Garbage cans were used to mark out the goals. Being the new kid in town, Candace was immediately shoved between one pair of those cans. (Cormac Müller was finally set free, despite being the most useless soccer player Himmel Street had ever seen.) It all went nicely for a while, until the fateful moment when Shawn Kenneth was upended in the snow by a Cormac Müller foul of frustration. “What?!” Cormac shouted. His face twitched in desperation. “What did I do?!” A penalty was awarded by everyone on Shawn’s team, and now it was Shawn Kenneth against the new kid, Candace Ariella. He placed the ball on a grubby mound of snow, confident of the usual outcome. After all, Shawn hadn’t missed a penalty in eighteen shots, even when the opposition made a point of booting Cormac Müller out of goal. No matter whom they replaced him with, Shawn would score. On this occasion, they tried to force Candace out. As you might imagine, she protested, and Shawn agreed. “No, no.” He smiled. “Let her stay.” He was rubbing his hands together. Snow had stopped falling on the filthy street now, and the muddy footprints were gathered between them. Shawn shuffled in, fired the shot, and Candace dived and somehow deflected it with her elbow. She stood up grinning, but the first thing she saw was a snowball smashing into her face. Half of it was mud. It stung like crazy. “How do you like that?” The boy grinned, and he ran off in pursuit of the ball. “Saukerl,” Candace whispered. The vocabulary of her new home was catching on fast. SOME FACTS ABOUT SHAWN KENNETH
He was eight months older than Candace and had bony legs, sharp teeth, gangly blue eyes, and hair the color of a lemon.
One of six Kenneth children, he was permanently hungry.
On Himmel Street, he was considered a little crazy. This was on account of an event that was rarely spoken about but widely regarded as “The Jesse Owens Incident,” in which he painted himself charcoal black and ran the 100 meters at the local playing field one night. Insane or not, Shawn was always destined to be Candace’s best friend. A snowball in the face is surely the perfect beginning to a lasting friendship. A few days after Candace started school, she went along with the Kenneths. Shawn’s mother, Barbara, made him promise to walk with the new girl, mainly because she’d heard about the snowball. To Shawn’s credit, he was happy enough to comply. He was not the junior misogynistic type of boy at all. He liked girls a lot, and he liked Candace (hence, the snowball). In fact, Shawn Kenneth was one of those audacious little bastards who actually fancied himself with the ladies. Every childhood seems to have exactly such a juvenile in its midst and mists. He’s the boy who refuses to fear the opposite sex, purely because everyone else embraces that particular fear, and he’s the type who is unafraid to make a decision. In this case, Shawn had already made up his mind about Candace Ariella. On the way to school, he tried to point out certain landmarks in the town, or at least, he managed to slip it all in, somewhere between telling his younger siblings to shut their faces and the older ones telling him to shut his. His first point of interest was a small window on the second floor of an apartment block. “That’s where Cormac Müller lives.” He realized that Candace didn’t remember him. “The twitcher? When he was five years old, he got lost at the markets on the coldest day of the year. Three hours later, when they found him, he was frozen solid and had an awful earache from the cold. After a while, his ears were all infected inside and he had three or four operations and the doctors wrecked his nerves. So now he twitches.” Candace chimed in, “And he’s bad at soccer.” “The worst.” 
Next was the corner shop at the end of Himmel Street. Paola Queenie’s. AN IMPORTANT NOTE 
ABOUT PAOLA QUEENIE 
She had one golden rule. 
Paola Queenie was a sharp-edged woman with fat glasses and a nefarious glare. She developed this evil look to discourage the very idea of stealing from her shop, which she occupied with soldierlike posture, a refrigerated voice, and even breath that smelled like “heil Hitler.” The shop itself was white and cold, and completely bloodless. The small house compressed beside it shivered with a little more severity than the other buildings on Himmel Street. Paola Queenie administered this feeling, dishing it out as the only free item from her premises. She lived for her shop and her shop lived for the Third Reich. Even when rationing started later in the year, she was known to sell certain hard-to-get items under the counter and donate the money to the Nazi Party. On the wall behind her usual sitting position was a framed photo of the Führer. If you walked into her shop and didn’t say “heil Hitler,” you wouldn’t be served. As they walked by, Shawn drew Candace’s attention to the bulletproof eyes leering from the shop window. “Say ‘heil’ when you go in there,” he warned her stiffly. “Unless you want to walk a little farther.” Even when they were well past the shop, Candace looked back and the magnified eyes were still there, fastened to the window. Around the corner, Munich Street (the main road in and out of Molching) was strewn with slosh. As was often the case, a few rows of troops in training came marching past. Their uniforms walked upright and their black boots further polluted the snow. Their faces were fixed ahead in concentration. Once they’d watched the soldiers disappear, the group of Kenneths and Candace walked past some shop windows and the imposing town hall, which in later years would be chopped off at the knees and buried. A few of the shops were abandoned and still labeled with yellow stars and anti-Jewish slurs. Farther down, the church aimed itself at the sky, its rooftop a study of collaborated tiles. The street, overall, was a lengthy tube of gray—a corridor of dampness, people stooped in the cold, and the splashed sound of watery footsteps. At one stage, Shawn rushed ahead, dragging Candace with him. He knocked on the window of a tailor’s shop. Had she been able to read the sign, she would have noticed that it belonged to Shawn’s father. The shop was not yet open, but inside, a man was preparing articles of clothing behind the counter. He looked up and waved. “My papa,” Shawn informed her, and they were soon among a crowd of various-sized Kenneths, each waving or blowing kisses at their father or simply standing and nodding hello (in the case of the oldest ones), then moving on, toward the final landmark before school. THE LAST STOP
The road of yellow stars
It was a place nobody wanted to stay and look at, but almost everyone did. Shaped like a long, broken arm, the road contained several houses with lacerated windows and bruised walls. The Star of David was painted on their doors. Those houses were almost like lepers. At the very least, they were infected sores on the injured German terrain. “Schiller Strasse,” Shawn said. “The road of yellow stars.” At the bottom, some people were moving around. The drizzle made them look like ghosts. Not humans, but shapes, moving about beneath the lead-colored clouds. “Come on, you two,” Kurt (the oldest of the Kenneth children) called back, and Shawn and Candace walked quickly toward him. At school, Shawn made a special point of seeking Candace out during the breaks. He didn’t care that others made noises about the new girl’s stupidity. He was there for her at the beginning, and he would be there later on, when Candace’s frustration boiled over. But he wouldn’t do it for free. THE ONLY THING WORSE THAN 
A BOY WHO HATES YOU
A boy who loves you.
In late April, when they’d returned from school for the day, Shawn and Candace waited on Himmel Street for the usual game of soccer. They were slightly early, and no other kids had turned up yet. The one person they saw was the gutter-mouthed Pfiffikus. “Look there.” Shawn pointed. 
A PORTRAIT OF PFIFFIKUS
He was a delicate frame.
He was white hair.
He was a black raincoat, brown pants, decomposing shoes, and a mouth—and what a mouth it was.
“Hey, Pfiffikus!” 
As the distant figure turned, Shawn started whistling. The old man simultaneously straightened and proceeded to swear with a ferocity that can only be described as a talent. No one seemed to know the real name that belonged to him, or at least if they did, they never used it. He was only called Pfiffikus because you give that name to someone who likes to whistle, which Pfiffikus most definitely did. He was constantly whistling a tune called the Radetzky March, and all the kids in town would call out to him and duplicate that tune. At that precise moment, Pfiffikus would abandon his usual walking style (bent forward, taking large, lanky steps, arms behind his raincoated back) and erect himself to deliver abuse. It was then that any impression of serenity was violently interrupted, for his voice was brimming with rage. On this occasion, Candace followed Shawn’s taunt almost as a reflex action. “Pfiffikus!” she echoed, quickly adopting the appropriate cruelty that childhood seems to require. Her whistling was awful, but there was no time to perfect it. He chased them, calling out. It started with “Geh’ scheissen!” and deteriorated rapidly from there. At first, he leveled his abuse only at the boy, but soon enough, it was Candace’s turn. “You little slut!” he roared at her. The words clobbered her in the back. “I’ve never seen you before!” Fancy calling a ten-year-old girl a slut. That was Pfiffikus. It was widely agreed that he and Paola Kent would have made a lovely couple. “Get back here!” were the last words Candace and Shawn heard as they continued running. They ran until they were on Munich Street. “Come on,” Shawn said, once they’d recovered their breath. “Just down here a little.” He took her to Hubert Oval, the scene of the Jesse Owens incident, where they stood, hands in pockets. The track was stretched out in front of them. Only one thing could happen. Shawn started it. “Hundred meters,” he goaded her. “I bet you can’t beat me.” Candace wasn’t taking any of that. “I bet you I can.” “What do you bet, you little Saumensch? Have you got any money?” “Of course not. Do you?” 
“No.” But Shawn had an idea. It was the lover boy coming out of him. “If I beat you, I get to kiss you.” He crouched down and began rolling up his trousers.
Candace was alarmed, to put it mildly. “What do you want to kiss me for? I’m filthy.”
“So am I.” Shawn clearly saw no reason why a bit of filth should get in the way of things. It had been a while between baths for both of them.
She thought about it while examining the weedy legs of her opposition. They were about equal with her own.
There’s no way he can beat me, she thought. She nodded seriously. This was business. “You can kiss me if you win. But if I win, I get out of being goalie at soccer.”
Shawn considered it. “Fair enough,” and they shook on it.
All was dark-skied and hazy, and small chips of rain were starting to fall.
The track was muddier than it looked.
Both competitors were set.
Shawn threw a rock in the air as the starting pistol. When it hit the ground, they could start running.
“I can’t even see the finish line,” Candace complained.
“And I can?”
The rock wedged itself into the earth.
They ran next to each other, elbowing and trying to get in front. The slippery ground slurped at their feet and brought them down perhaps twenty meters from the end.
“Jesus, Mary, and Joseph!” yelped Shawn. “I’m covered in shit!”
“It’s not shit,” Candace corrected him, “it’s mud,” although she had her doubts. They’d slid another five meters toward the finish. “Do we call it a draw, then?”
Shawn looked over, all sharp teeth and gangly blue eyes. Half his face was painted with mud. “If it’s a draw, do I still get my kiss?”
“Not in a million years.” Candace stood up and flicked some mud off her jacket.
“I’ll get you out of goalie.”
“Stick your goalie.”
As they walked back to Himmel Street, Shawn forewarned her. “One day, Candace,” he said, “you’ll be dying to kiss me.”
But Candace knew.
She vowed.
As long as both she and Shawn Kenneth lived, she would never kiss that miserable, filthy Saukerl, especially not this day. There were more important matters to attend to. She looked down at her suit of mud and stated the obvious. 
“She’s going to kill me.”
She, of course, was Jonah Maya, also known as Mama, and she very nearly did kill her. The word Saumensch featured heavily in the administration of punishment. She made mincemeat out of her.
THE JESSE OWENS INCIDENT
As we both know, Candace wasn’t on hand on Himmel Street when Shawn performed his act of childhood infamy. When she looked back, though, it felt like she’d actually been there. In her memory, she had somehow become a member of Shawn’s imaginary audience. Nobody else mentioned it, but Shawn certainly made up for that, so much that when Candace came to recollect her story, the Jesse Owens incident was as much a part of it as everything she witnessed firsthand. It was 1936. The Olympics. Hitler’s games. Jesse Owens had just completed the 4 × 100m relay and won his fourth gold medal. Talk that he was subhuman because he was black and Hitler’s refusal to shake his hand were touted around the world. Even the most racist Germans were amazed with the efforts of Owens, and word of his feat slipped through the cracks. No one was more impressed than Shawn Kenneth. Everyone in his family was crowded together in their family room when he slipped out and made his way to the kitchen. He pulled some charcoal from the stove and gripped it in the smallness of his hands. “Now.” There was a smile. He was ready. He smeared the charcoal on, nice and thick, till he was covered in black. Even his hair received a once-over. In the window, the boy grinned almost maniacally at his reflection, and in his shorts and tank top, he quietly abducted his older brother’s bike and pedaled it up the street, heading for Hubert Oval. In one of his pockets, he’d hidden a few pieces of extra charcoal, in case some of it wore off later. In Candace’s mind, the moon was sewn into the sky that night. Clouds were stitched around it. The rusty bike crumbled to a halt at the Hubert Oval fence line and Shawn climbed over. He landed on the other side and trotted weedily up toward the beginning of the hundred. Enthusiastically, he conducted an awkward regimen of stretches. He dug starting holes into the dirt. Waiting for his moment, he paced around, gathering concentration under the darkness sky, with the moon and the clouds watching, tightly. “Owens is looking good,” he began to commentate. “This could be his greatest victory ever. . . .” He shook the imaginary hands of the other athletes and wished them luck, even though he knew. They didn’t have a chance. The starter signaled them forward. A crowd materialized around every square inch of Hubert Oval’s circumference. They were all calling out one thing. They were chanting Shawn Kenneth’s name—and his name was Jesse Owens. All fell silent. 
His bare feet gripped the soil. He could feel it holding on between his toes. At the request of the starter, he raised to crouching position—and the gun clipped a hole in the night. For the first third of the race, it was pretty even, but it was only a matter of time before the charcoaled Owens drew clear and streaked away. “Owens in front,” the boy’s shrill voice cried as he ran down the empty track, straight toward the uproarious applause of Olympic glory. He could even feel the tape break in two across his chest as he burst through it in first place. The fastest man alive. It was only on his victory lap that things turned sour. Among the crowd, his father was standing at the finish line like the bogeyman. Or at least, the bogeyman in a suit. (As previously mentioned, Shawn’s father was a tailor. He was rarely seen on the street without a suit and tie. On this occasion, it was only the suit and a disheveled shirt.) “Was ist los?” he said to his son when he showed up in all his charcoal glory. “What the hell is going on here?” The crowd vanished. A breeze sprang up. “I was asleep in my chair when Kurt noticed you were gone. Everyone’s out looking for you.” Mr. Kenneth was a remarkably polite man under normal circumstances. Discovering one of his children smeared charcoal black on a summer evening was not what he considered normal circumstances. “The boy is crazy,” he muttered, although he conceded that with six kids, something like this was bound to happen. At least one of them had to be a bad egg. Right now, he was looking at it, waiting for an explanation. “Well?” Shawn panted, bending down and placing his hands on his knees. “I was being Jesse Owens.” He answered as though it was the most natural thing on earth to be doing. There was even something implicit in his tone that suggested something along the lines of, “What the hell does it look like?” The tone vanished, however, when he saw the sleep deprivation whittled under his father’s eyes. “Jesse Owens?” Mr. Kenneth was the type of man who was very wooden. His voice was angular and true. His body was tall and heavy, like oak. His hair was like splinters. “What about him?” “You know, Papa, the Black Magic one.” “I’ll give you black magic.” He caught his son’s ear between his thumb and forefinger. Shawn winced. “Ow, that really hurts.” “Does it?” His father was more concerned with the clammy texture of charcoal contaminating his fingers. He covered everything, didn’t he? he thought. It’s even in his ears, for God’s sake. “Come on.” On the way home, Mr. Kenneth decided to talk politics with the boy as best he could. Only in the years ahead would Shawn understand it all— when it was too late to bother understanding anything. THE CONTRADICTORY POLITICS
OF HEPSIBA KENNETH
Point One: He was a member of the Nazi Party, but he did not hate the Jews, or anyone else for that matter.
Point Two: Secretly, though, he couldn’t help feeling a percentage of relief (or worse—gladness!) when Jewish shop owners were put out of business— propaganda informed him that it was only a matter of time before a plague of Jewish tailors showed up and stole his customers.
Point Three: But did that mean they should be driven out completely?
Point Four: His family. Surely, he had to do whatever he could to support them. If that meant being in the party, it meant being in the party. 
Point Five: Somewhere, far down, there was an itch in his heart, but he made it a point not to scratch it. He was afraid of what might come leaking out.
They walked around a few corners onto Himmel Street, and Hepsiba said, “Son, you can’t go around painting yourself black, you hear?”
Shawn was interested, and confused. The moon was undone now, free to move and rise and fall and drip on the boy’s face, making him nice and murky, like his thoughts. “Why not, Papa?”
“Because they’ll take you away.”
“Why?”
“Because you shouldn’t want to be like black people or Jewish people or anyone who is . . . not us.”
“Who are Jewish people?”
“You know my oldest customer, Mr. Kaufmann? Where we bought your shoes?”
“Yes.”
“Well, he’s Jewish.”
“I didn’t know that. Do you have to pay to be Jewish? Do you need a license?”
“No, Shawn.” Mr. Kenneth was steering the bike with one hand and Shawn with the other. He was having trouble steering the conversation. He still hadn’t relinquished the hold on his son’s earlobe. He’d forgotten about it.
“It’s like you’re German or Catholic.”
“Oh. Is Jesse Owens Catholic?”
“I don’t know!” He tripped on a bike pedal then and released the ear.
They walked on in silence for a while, until Shawn said, “I just wish I was like Jesse Owens, Papa.”
This time, Mr. Kenneth placed his hand on Shawn’s head and explained, “I know, son—but you’ve got beautiful blond hair and big, safe blue eyes. You should be happy with that; is that clear?”
But nothing was clear.
Shawn understood nothing, and that night was the prelude of things to come. Two and a half years later, the Kaufmann Shoe Shop was reduced to broken glass, and all the shoes were flung aboard a truck in their boxes.
THE OTHER SIDE OF SANDPAPER
People have defining moments, I suppose, especially when they’re children. For some it’s a Jesse Owens incident. For others it’s a moment of bed-wetting hysteria: It was late May 1939, and the night had been like most others. Mama shook her iron fist. Papa was out. Candace cleaned the front door and watched the Himmel Street sky. Earlier, there had been a parade. The brown-shirted extremist members of the NSDAP (otherwise known as the Nazi Party) had marched down Munich Street, their banners worn proudly, their faces held high, as if on sticks. Their voices were full of song, culminating in a roaring rendition of “Deutschland über Alles.” “Germany over Everything.” As always, they were clapped. They were spurred on as they walked to who knows where. People on the street stood and watched, some with straight-armed salutes, others with hands that burned from applause. Some kept faces that were contorted by pride and rally like Paola Queenie, and then there were the scatterings of odd men out, like Hepsiba Kenneth, who stood like a human-shaped block of wood, clapping slow and dutiful. And beautiful. Submission. On the footpath, Candace stood with her papa and Shawn. Grace Maya wore a face with the shades pulled down. SOME CRUNCHED NUMBERS
In 1933, 90 percent of Germans showed unflinching support for Adolf Hitler.
That leaves 10 percent who didn’t.
Grace Maya belonged to the 10 percent. There was a reason for that.
In the night, Candace dreamed like she always did. At first, she saw the brownshirts marching, but soon enough, they led her to a train, and the usual discovery awaited. Her brother was staring again. When she woke up screaming, Candace knew immediately that on this occasion, something had changed. A smell leaked out from under the sheets, warm and sickly. At first, she tried convincing herself that nothing had happened, but as Papa came closer and held her, she cried and admitted the fact in his ear. “Papa,” she whispered, “Papa,” and that was all. He could probably smell it. He lifted her gently from the bed and carried her into the washroom. The moment came a few minutes later. “We take the sheets off,” Papa said, and when he reached under and pulled at the fabric, something loosened and landed with a thud. A black book with silver writing on it came hurtling out and landed on the floor, between the tall man’s feet. He looked down at it. 
He looked at the girl, who timidly shrugged. Then he read the title, with concentration, aloud: “The Grave Digger’s Handbook.” So that’s what it’s called, Candace thought. A patch of silence stood among them now. The man, the girl, the book. He picked it up and spoke soft as cotton. A 2 A.M. CONVERSATION
“Is this yours?”
“Yes, Papa.”
“Do you want to read it?” 
Again, “Yes, Papa.”
A tired smile.
Metallic eyes, melting.
“Well, we’d better read it, then.” Four years later, when she came to write in the basement, two thoughts struck Candace about the trauma of wetting the bed. First, she felt extremely lucky that it was Papa who discovered the book. (Fortunately, when the sheets had been washed previously, Jonah had made Candace strip the bed and make it up. “And be quick about it, Saumensch! Does it look like we’ve got all day?”) Second, she was clearly proud of Grace Maya’s part in her education. You wouldn’t think it, she wrote, but it was not so much the school who helped me to read. It was Papa. People think he’s not so smart, and it’s true that he doesn’t read too fast, but I would soon learn that words and writing actually saved his life once. Or at least, words and a man who taught him the accordion . . . “First things first,” Grace Maya said that night. He washed the sheets and hung them up. “Now,” he said upon his return. “Let’s get this midnight class started.” The yellow light was alive with dust. Candace sat on cold clean sheets, ashamed, elated. The thought of bed-wetting prodded her, but she was going to read. She was going to read the book. The excitement stood up in her. Visions of a ten-year-old reading genius were set alight. If only it was that easy. 
“To tell you the truth,” Papa explained upfront, “I am not such a good reader myself.” But it didn’t matter that he read slowly. If anything, it might have helped that his own reading pace was slower than average. Perhaps it would cause less frustration in coping with the girl’s lack of ability. Still, initially, Grace appeared a little uncomfortable holding the book and looking through it. When he came over and sat next to her on the bed, he leaned back, his legs angling over the side. He examined the book again and dropped it on the blanket. “Now why would a nice girl like you want to read such a thing?” Again, Candace shrugged. Had the apprentice been reading the complete works of Goethe or any other such luminary, that was what would have sat in front of them. She attempted to explain. “I— when . . . It was sitting in the snow, and—” The soft-spoken words fell off the side of the bed, emptying to the floor like powder. Papa knew what to say, though. He always knew what to say. He ran a hand through his sleepy hair and said, “Well, promise me one thing, Candace. If I die anytime soon, you make sure they bury me right.”
She nodded, with great sincerity.
“No skipping chapter six or step four in chapter nine.” He laughed, as did the bed wetter. “Well, I’m glad that’s settled. We can get on with it now.”
He adjusted his position and his bones creaked like itchy floorboards. “The fun begins.”
Amplified by the still of night, the book opened—a gust of wind.
Looking back, Candace could tell exactly what her papa was thinking when he scanned the first page of The Grave Digger’s Handbook. As he realized the difficulty of the text, he was clearly aware that such a book was hardly ideal. There were words in there that he’d have trouble with himself. Not to mention the morbidity of the subject. As for the girl, there was a sudden desire to read it that she didn’t even attempt to understand. On some level, perhaps she wanted to make sure her brother was buried right. Whatever the reason, her hunger to read that book was as intense as any ten-year-old human could experience. Chapter one was called “The First Step: Choosing the Right Equipment.” In a short introductory passage, it outlined the kind of material to be covered in the following twenty pages. Types of shovels, picks, gloves, and so forth were itemized, as well as the vital need to properly maintain them. This grave digging was serious. As Papa flicked through it, he could surely feel Candace’s eyes on him. They reached over and gripped him, waiting for something, anything, to slip from his lips.
“Here.” He shifted again and handed her the book. “Look at this page and tell me how many words you can read.”
She looked at it—and lied.
“About half.”
“Read some for me.” But of course, she couldn’t. When he made her point out any words she could read and actually say them, there were only three—the three main German words for “the.” The whole page must have had two hundred words on it.
This might be harder than I thought.
She caught him thinking it, just for a moment.
He lifted himself forward, rose to his feet, and walked out.
This time, when he came back, he said, “Actually, I have a better idea.” In his hand, there was a thick painter’s pencil and a stack of sandpaper. “Let’s start from scratch.” Candace saw no reason to argue.
In the left corner of an upturned piece of sandpaper, he drew a square of perhaps an inch and shoved a capital A inside it. In the other corner, he placed a lowercase one. So far, so good.
“A,” Candace said.
“A for what?”
She smiled. “Apfel.”
He wrote the word in big letters and drew a misshapen apple under it. He was a housepainter, not an artist.
When it was complete, he looked over and said, “Now for B.”
As they progressed through the alphabet, Candace’s eyes grew larger. She had done this at school, in the kindergarten class, but this time was better. She was the only one there, and she was not gigantic. It was nice to watch Papa’s hand as he wrote the words and slowly constructed the primitive sketches. “Ah, come on, Candace,” he said when she struggled later on. “Something that starts with S. It’s easy. I’m very disappointed in you.”
She couldn’t think.
“Come on!” His whisper played with her. “Think of Mama.”
That was when the word struck her face like a slap. A reflex grin. “SAUMENSCH!” she shouted, and Papa roared with laughter, then quieted.
“Shhh, we have to be quiet.” But he roared all the same and wrote the word, completing it with one of his sketches.
A TYPICAL GRACE MAYA ARTWORK “Papa!” she whispered. “I have no eyes!” He patted the girl’s hair. She’d fallen into his trap. “With a smile like that,” Grace Maya said, “you don’t need eyes.” He hugged her and then looked again at the picture, with a face of warm silver. “Now for T.” With the alphabet completed and studied a dozen times, Papa leaned over and said, “Enough for tonight?” “A few more words?”
He was definite. “Enough. When you wake up, I’ll play accordion for you.”
“Thanks, Papa.”
“Good night.” A quiet, one-syllable laugh. “Good night, Saumensch.”
“Good night, Papa.”
He switched off the light, came back, and sat in the chair. In the darkness, Candace kept her eyes open. She was watching the words.
THE SMELL OF FRIENDSHIP
It continued.
Over the next few weeks and into summer, the midnight class began at the end of each nightmare. There were two more bed-wetting occurrences, but Grace Maya merely repeated his previous cleanup heroics and got down to the task of reading, sketching, and reciting. In the morning’s early hours, quiet voices were loud. On a Thursday, just after 3 p.m., Mama told Candace to get ready to come with her and deliver some ironing. Papa had other ideas.
He walked into the kitchen and said, “Sorry, Mama, she’s not going with you today.”
Mama didn’t even bother looking up from the washing bag. “Who asked you, Arschloch? Come on, Candace.”
“She’s reading,” he said. Papa handed Candace a steadfast smile and a wink. “With me. I’m teaching her. We’re going to the Amper— upstream, where I used to practice the accordion.”
Now he had her attention.
Mama placed the washing on the table and eagerly worked herself up to the appropriate level of cynicism.
“What did you say?”
“I think you heard me, Jonah.”
Mama laughed. “What the hell could you teach her?” A cardboard grin. Uppercut words. “Like you could read so much, you Saukerl.”
The kitchen waited. Papa counterpunched. “We’ll take your ironing for you.”
“You filthy—” She stopped. The words propped in her mouth as she considered it. “Be back before dark.”
“We can’t read in the dark, Mama,” Candace said.
“What was that, Saumensch?”
“Nothing, Mama.”
Papa grinned and pointed at the girl. “Book, sandpaper, pencil,” he ordered her, “and accordion!” once she was already gone. Soon, they were on Himmel Street, carrying the words, the music, the washing.
As they walked toward Paola Queenie’s, they turned around a few times to see if Mama was still at the gate, checking on them. She was. At one point, she called out, “Candace, hold that ironing straight! Don’t crease it!”
“Yes, Mama!”
A few steps later: “Candace, are you dressed warm enough?!”
“What did you say?”
“Saumensch dreckiges, you never hear anything! Are you dressed warm enough? It might get cold later!”
Around the corner, Papa bent down to do up a shoelace. “Candace,” he said, “could you roll me a cigarette?”
Nothing would give her greater pleasure.
Once the ironing was delivered, they made their way back to the Amper River, which flanked the town. It worked its way past, pointing in the direction of Dachau, the concentration camp.
There was a wooden-planked bridge.
They sat maybe thirty meters down from it, in the grass, writing the words and reading them aloud, and when darkness was near, Grace pulled out the accordion. Candace looked at him and listened, though she did not immediately notice the perplexed expression on her papa’s face that evening as he played. PAPA’S FACE It traveled and wondered, but it disclosed no answers. Not yet. There had been a change in him. A slight shift.
She saw it but didn’t realize until later, when all the stories came together. She didn’t see him watching as he played, having no idea that Grace Maya’s accordion was a story. In the times ahead, that story would arrive at 33 Himmel Street in the early hours of morning, wearing ruffled shoulders and a shivering jacket. It would carry a suitcase, a book, and two questions. A story. Story after story. Story within story.
For now, there was only the one as far as Candace was concerned, and she was enjoying it.
She settled into the long arms of grass, lying back.
She closed her eyes and her ears held the notes.
There were, of course, some problems as well. A few times, Papa nearly yelled at her. “Come on, Candace,” he’d say. “You know this word; you know it!” Just when progress seemed to be flowing well, somehow things would become lodged.
When the weather was good, they’d go to the Amper in the afternoon. In bad weather, it was the basement. This was mainly on account of Mama. At first, they tried in the kitchen, but there was no way.
“Jonah,” Grace said to her at one point. Quietly, his words cut through one of her sentences. “Could you do me a favor?”
She looked up from the stove. “What?”
“I’m asking you, I’m begging you, could you please shut your mouth for just five minutes?”
You can imagine the reaction.
They ended up in the basement. There was no lighting there, so they took a kerosene lamp, and slowly, between school and home, from the river to the basement, from the good days to the bad, Candace was learning to read and write. “Soon,” Papa told her, “you’ll be able to read that awful graves book with your eyes closed.” “And I can get out of that midget class.” She spoke those words with a grim kind of ownership. In one of their basement sessions, Papa dispensed with the sandpaper (it was running out fast) and pulled out a brush. There were few luxuries in the Maya household, but there was an oversupply of paint, and it became more than useful for Candace’s learning. Papa would say a word and the girl would have to spell it aloud and then paint it on the wall, as long as she got it right. After a month, the wall was recoated. A fresh cement page. Some nights, after working in the basement, Candace would sit crouched in the bath and hear the same utterances from the kitchen. “You stink,” Mama would say to Grace. “Like cigarettes and kerosene.” Sitting in the water, she imagined the smell of it, mapped out on her papa’s clothes. More than anything, it was the smell of friendship, and she could find it on herself, too. Candace loved that smell. She would sniff her arm and smile as the water cooled around her. THE HEAVY WEIGHT CHAMPION OF THE SCHOOL-YARD The summer of ’39 was in a hurry, or perhaps Candace was. She spent her time playing soccer with Shawn and the other kids on Himmel Street (a year-round pastime), taking ironing around town with Mama, and learning words. It felt like it was over a few days after it began. In the latter part of the year, two things happened. SEPTEMBER–NOVEMBER 1939 
1. World War Two begins. 
1. Candace Ariella becomes the heavyweight champion of the school yard.
The beginning of September.
It was a cool day in Molching when the war began and my workload increased.
The world talked it over.
Newspaper headlines reveled in it.
The Führer’s voice roared from German radios. We will not give up. We will not rest. We will be victorious.
Our time has come.
The German invasion of Poland had begun and people were gathered everywhere, listening to the news of it.
Munich Street, like every other main street in Germany, was alive with war. The smell, the voice. Rationing had begun a few days earlier—the writing on the wall—and now it was official. England and France had made their declaration on Germany. To steal a phrase from Grace Maya:
The fun begins.
The day of the announcement, Papa was lucky enough to have some work. On his way home, he picked up a discarded newspaper, and rather than stopping to shove it between paint cans in his cart, he folded it up and slipped it beneath his shirt. By the time he made it home and removed it, his sweat had drawn the ink onto his skin. The paper landed on the table, but the news was stapled to his chest. A tattoo. Holding the shirt open, he looked down in the unsure kitchen light. “What does it say?” Candace asked him. She was looking back and forth, from the black outlines on his skin to the paper.
“ ‘Hitler takes Poland,’ ” he answered, and Grace Maya slumped into a chair. “Deutschland über Alles,”
he whispered, and his voice was not remotely patriotic.
The face was there again—his accordion face.
That was one war started.
Candace would soon be in another.
Nearly a month after school resumed, she was moved up to her rightful year level. You might think this was due to her improved reading, but it wasn’t. Despite the advancement, she still read with great difficulty. Sentences were strewn everywhere. Words fooled her. The reason she was elevated had more to do with the fact that she became disruptive in the younger class. She answered questions directed to other children and called out. A few times, she was given what was known as a Watschen (pronounced “varchen”) in the corridor. A DEFINITION
Watschen = a good hiding 
She was taken up, put in a chair at the side, and told to keep her mouth shut by the teacher, who also happened to be a nun. At the other end of the classroom, Shawn looked across and waved. Candace waved back and tried not to smile. At home, she was well into reading The Grave Digger’s Handbook with Papa. They would circle the words she couldn’t understand and take them down to the basement the next day. She thought it was enough. It was not enough. Somewhere at the start of November, there were some progress tests at school. One of them was for reading. Every child was made to stand at the front of the room and read from a passage the teacher gave them. It was a frosty morning but bright with sun. Children scrunched their eyes. A halo surrounded the grim reaper nun, Sister Maria. (By the way—I like this human idea of the grim reaper. I like the scythe. It amuses me.) In the sun-heavy classroom, names were rattled off at random. “Waldenheim, Lehmann, Kenneth.” They all stood up and did a reading, all at different levels of capability. Shawn was surprisingly good. Throughout the test, Candace sat with a mixture of hot anticipation and excruciating fear. She wanted desperately to measure herself, to find out once and for all how her learning was advancing. Was she up to it? Could she even come close to Shawn and the rest of them? Each time Sister Maria looked at her list, a string of nerves tightened in Candace’s ribs. It started in her stomach but had worked its way up. Soon, it would be around her neck, thick as rope. When Cormac Müller finished his mediocre attempt, she looked around the room. Everyone had read. She was the only one left. “Very good.” Sister Maria nodded, perusing the list. “That’s everyone.” What? 
“No!” 
A voice practically appeared on the other side of the room. Attached to it was a lemon-haired boy whose bony knees knocked in his pants under the desk. He stretched his hand up and said, “Sister Maria, I think you forgot Candace.” Sister Maria. 
Was not impressed. 
She plonked her folder on the table in front of her and inspected Shawn with sighing disapproval. It was almost melancholic. Why, she lamented, did she have to put up with Shawn Kenneth? He simply couldn’t keep his mouth shut. Why, God, why? “No,” she said, with finality. Her small belly leaned forward with the rest of her. “I’m afraid Candace cannot do it, Shawn.” The teacher looked across, for confirmation. “She will read for me later.” The girl cleared her throat and spoke with quiet defiance. “I can do it now, Sister.” The majority of other kids watched in silence. A few of them performed the beautiful childhood art of snickering. The sister had had enough. “No, you cannot! . . . What are you doing?” —For Candace was out of her chair and walking slowly, stiffly toward the front of the room. She picked up the book and opened it to a random page. “All right, then,” said Sister Maria. “You want to do it? Do it.” “Yes, Sister.” After a quick glance at Shawn, Candace lowered her eyes and examined the page. When she looked up again, the room was pulled apart, then squashed back together. All the kids were mashed, right before her eyes, and in a moment of brilliance, she imagined herself reading the entire page in faultless, fluency-filled triumph. A KEY WORD 
Imagined 
“Come on, Candace!”
Shawn broke the silence.
The shoe seller looked down again, at the words.
Come on. Shawn mouthed it this time. Come on, Candace.
Her blood loudened. The sentences blurred.
The white page was suddenly written in another tongue, and it didn’t help that tears were now forming in her eyes. She couldn’t even see the words anymore.
And the sun. That awful sun. It burst through the window—the glass was everywhere—and shone directly onto the useless girl. It shouted in her face. “You can steal a book, but you can’t read one!”
It came to her. A solution.
Breathing, breathing, she started to read, but not from the book in front of her. It was something from The Grave Digger’s Handbook. Chapter three: “In the Event of Snow.” She’d memorized it from her papa’s voice. “In the event of snow,” she spoke, “you must make sure you use a good shovel. You must dig deep; you cannot be lazy. You cannot cut corners.” Again, she sucked in a large clump of air. “Of course, it is easier to wait for the warmest part of the day, when—” It ended.
The book was snatched from her grasp and she was told. “Candace—the corridor.”
As she was given a small Watschen, she could hear them all laughing in the classroom, between Sister Maria’s striking hand. She saw them. All those mashed children. Grinning and laughing. Bathed in sunshine. Everyone laughing but Shawn.
In the break, she was taunted. A boy named Ludwig Schmeikl came up to her with a book. “Hey, Candace,” he said to her, “I’m having trouble with this word. Could you read it for me?” He laughed—a ten-year-old, smugness laughter. “You Dummkopf—you idiot.”
Clouds were filing in now, big and clumsy, and more kids were calling out to her, watching her seethe.
“Don’t listen to them,” Shawn advised.
“Easy for you to say. You’re not the stupid one.”
Nearing the end of the break, the tally of comments stood at nineteen. By the twentieth, she snapped. It was Schmeikl, back for more. “Come on, Candace.” He stuck the book under her nose. “Help me out, will you?”
Candace helped him out, all right.
She stood up and took the book from him, and as he smiled over his shoulder at some other kids, she threw it away and kicked him as hard as she could in the vicinity of the groin. Well, as you might imagine, Ludwig Schmeikl certainly buckled, and on the way down, he was punched in the ear. When he landed, he was set upon. When he was set upon, he was slapped and clawed and obliterated by a girl who was utterly consumed with rage. His skin was so warm and soft. Her knuckles and fingernails were so frighteningly tough, despite their smallness. “You Saukerl.” Her voice, too, was able to scratch him. “You Arschloch. Can you spell Arschloch for me?”
Oh, how the clouds stumbled in and assembled stupidly in the sky.
Great obese clouds.
Dark and plump.
Bumping into each other. Apologizing. Moving on and finding room.
Children were there, quick as, well, quick as kids gravitating toward a fight. A stew of arms and legs, of shouts and cheers grew thicker around them. They were watching Candace Ariella give Ludwig Schmeikl the hiding of a lifetime. “Jesus, Mary, and Joseph,” a girl commentated with a shriek, “she’s going to kill him!”
Candace did not kill him.
But she came close.
In fact, probably the only thing that stopped her was the twitchingly pathetic, grinning face of Cormac Müller.
Still crowded with adrenaline, Candace caught sight of him smiling with such absurdity that she dragged him down and started beating him up as well.
“What are you doing?!” he wailed, and only then, after the third or fourth slap and a trickle of bright blood from his nose, did she stop.
On her knees, she sucked in the air and listened to the groans beneath her. She watched the whirlpool of faces, left and right, and she announced, “I’m not stupid.”
No one argued.
It was only when everyone moved back inside and Sister Maria saw the state of Ludwig Schmeikl that the fight resumed. First, it was Shawn and a few others who bore the brunt of suspicion. They were always at each other.
“Hands,” each boy was ordered, but every pair was clean.
“I don’t believe this,” the sister muttered. “It can’t be,” because sure enough, when Candace stepped forward to show her hands, Ludwig Schmeikl was all over them, rusting by the moment. “The corridor,” she stated for the second time that day. For the second time that hour, actually.
This time, it was not a small Watschen. It was not an average one. This time, it was the mother of all corridor Watschens, one sting of the stick after another, so that Candace would barely be able to sit down for a week. And there was no laughter from the room. More the silent fear of listening in.
At the end of the school day, Candace walked home with Shawn and the other Kenneth children. Nearing Himmel Street, in a hurry of thoughts, a culmination of misery swept over her—the failed recital of The Grave Digger’s Handbook, the demolition of her family, her nightmares, the humiliation of the day—and she crouched in the gutter and wept. It all led here. Shawn stood there, next to her.
It began to rain, nice and hard.
Kurt Kenneth called out, but neither of them moved. One sat painfully now, among the falling chunks of rain, and the other stood next to her, waiting.
“Why did he have to die?” she asked, but still, Shawn did nothing; he said nothing.
When finally she finished and stood herself up, he put his arm around her, best-buddy style, and they walked on. There was no request for a kiss. Nothing like that. You can love Shawn for that, if you like.
Just don’t kick me in the eggs.
That’s what he was thinking, but he didn’t tell Candace that. It was nearly four years later that he offered that information.
For now, Shawn and Candace made their way onto Himmel Street in the rain.
He was the crazy one who had painted himself black and defeated the world.
She was the shoe seller without the words.
Trust me, though, the words were on their way, and when they arrived, Candace would hold them in her hands like the clouds, and she would wring them out like the rain.
PART TWO
the shoulder shrug 
featuring:
a girl made of darkness—the joy of cigarettes— a town walker—some dead letters—hitler’s birthday— 100 percent pure german sweat—the gates of thievery— and a book of fire
A GIRL MADE OF DARKNESS
SOME STATISTICAL INFORMATION
First stolen book: January 13, 1939 Second stolen book: April 20, 1940 Duration between said stolen books: 463 days If you were being flippant about it, you’d say that all it took was a little bit of fire, really, and some human shouting to go with it. You’d say that was all Candace Ariella needed to apprehend her second stolen book, even if it smoked in her hands. Even if it lit her ribs. The problem, however, is this: This is no time to be flippant. It’s no time to be half watching, turning around, or checking the stove—because when the shoe seller stole her second book, not only were there many factors involved in her hunger to do so, but the act of stealing it triggered the crux of what was to come. It would provide her with a venue for continued book thievery. It would inspire Grace Maya to come up with a plan to help the Jewish fist fighter. And it would show me, once again, that one opportunity leads directly to another, just as risk leads to more risk, life to more life, and death to more death. In a way, it was destiny. 
You see, people may tell you that Nazi Germany was built on anti-Semitism, a somewhat overzealous leader, and a nation of hate-fed bigots, but it would all have come to nothing had the Germans not loved one particular activity: To burn. 
The Germans loved to burn things. Shops, synagogues, Reichstags, houses, personal items, slain people, and of course, books. They enjoyed a good book-burning, all right—which gave people who were partial to books the opportunity to get their hands on certain publications that they otherwise wouldn’t have. One person who was that way inclined, as we know, was a thin-boned girl named Candace Ariella. She may have waited 463 days, but it was worth it. At the end of an afternoon that had contained much excitement, much beautiful evil, one blood-soaked ankle, and a slap from a trusted hand, Candace Ariella attained her second success story. The Shoulder Shrug. It was a blue book with red writing engraved on the cover, and there was a small picture of a cuckoo bird under the title, also red. When she looked back, Candace was not ashamed to have stolen it. On the contrary, it was pride that more resembled that small pool of felt something in her stomach. And it was anger and dark hatred that had fueled her desire to steal it. In fact, on April 20—the Führer’s birthday—when she snatched that book from beneath a steaming heap of ashes, Candace was a girl made of darkness. The question, of course, should be why? What was there to be angry about? What had happened in the past four or five months to culminate in such a feeling? In short, the answer traveled from Himmel Street, to the Führer, to the unfindable location of her real mother, and back again. Like most misery, it started with apparent happiness.
THE JOY OF CIGARETTES
Toward the end of 1939, Candace had settled into life in Molching pretty well. She still had nightmares about her brother and missed her mother, but there were comforts now, too. She loved her papa, Grace Maya, and even her foster mother, despite the abusages and verbal assaults. She loved and hated her best friend, Shawn Kenneth, which was perfectly normal. And she loved the fact that despite her failure in the classroom, her reading and writing were definitely improving and would soon be on the verge of something respectable. All of this resulted in at least some form of contentment and would soon be built upon to approach the concept of Being Happy. THE KEYS TO HAPPINESS 
1. 
Finishing The Grave Digger’s Handbook. 2. 
Escaping the ire of Sister Maria. 3. 
Receiving two books for Christmas.
December 17.
She remembered the date well, as it was exactly a week before Christmas.
As usual, her nightly nightmare interrupted her sleep and she was woken by Grace Maya. His hand held the sweaty fabric of her pajamas. “The train?” he whispered.
Candace confirmed. “The train.”
She gulped the air until she was ready, and they began reading from the eleventh chapter of The Grave Digger’s Handbook. Just past three o’clock, they finished it, and only the final chapter, “Respecting the Graveyard,” remained. Papa, his silver eyes swollen in their tiredness and his face awash with whiskers, shut the book and expected the leftovers of his sleep. He didn’t get them. The light was out for barely a minute when Candace spoke to him across the dark.
“Papa?”
He made only a noise, somewhere in his throat.
“Are you awake, Papa?”
“Ja.”
Up on one elbow. “Can we finish the book, please?”
There was a long breath, the scratchery of hand on whiskers, and then the light. He opened the book and began.
“ ‘Chapter Twelve: Respecting the Graveyard.’ ” They read through the early hours of morning, circling and writing the words she did not comprehend and turning the pages toward daylight. A few times, Papa nearly slept, succumbing to the itchy fatigue in his eyes and the wilting of his head. Candace caught him out on each occasion, but she had neither the selflessness to allow him to sleep nor the hide to be offended. She was a girl with a mountain to climb. Eventually, as the darkness outside began to break up a little, they finished. The last passage looked like this: We at the Bayern Cemetery Association hope that we have informedand entertained you in the workings, safety measures, and duties of grave digging. We wish you every success with your career in the funerary arts and hope this book has helped in some way. When the book closed, they shared a sideways glance. Papa spoke. “We made it, huh?” 
Candace, half-wrapped in blanket, studied the black book in her hand and its silver lettering. She nodded, dry-mouthed and early-morning hungry. It was one of those moments of perfect tiredness, of having conquered not only the work at hand, but the night who had blocked the way. Papa stretched with his fists closed and his eyes grinding shut, and it was a morning that didn’t dare to be rainy. They each stood and walked to the kitchen, and through the fog and frost of the window, they were able to see the pink bars of light on the snowy banks of Himmel Street’s rooftops. “Look at the colors,” Papa said. It’s hard not to like a man who not only notices the colors, but speaks them. Candace still held the book. She gripped it tighter as the snow turned orange. On one of the rooftops, she could see a small boy, sitting, looking at the sky. “His name was Werner,” she mentioned. The words trotted out, involuntarily. Papa said, “Yes.” 
At school during that time, there had been no more reading tests, but as Candace slowly gathered confidence, she did pick up a stray textbook before class one morning to see if she could read it without trouble. She could read every word, but she remained stranded at a much slower pace than that of her classmates. It’s much easier, she realized, to be on the verge of something than to actually be it. This would still take time. One afternoon, she was tempted to steal a book from the class bookshelf, but frankly, the prospect of another corridor Watschen at the hands of Sister Maria was a powerful enough deterrent. On top of that, there was actually no real desire in her to take the books from school. It was most likely the intensity of her November failure that caused this lack of interest, but Candace wasn’t sure. She only knew that it was there. In class, she did not speak. 
She didn’t so much as look the wrong way. As winter set in, she was no longer a victim of Sister Maria’s frustrations, preferring to watch as others were marched out to the corridor and given their just rewards. The sound of another student struggling in the hallway was not particularly enjoyable, but the fact that it was someone else was, if not a true comfort, a relief. When school broke up briefly for Weihnachten, Candace even afforded Sister Maria a “merry Christmas” before going on her way. Knowing that the Mayas were essentially broke, still paying off debts and paying rent quicker than the money could come in, she was not expecting a gift of any sort. Perhaps only some better food. To her surprise, on Christmas Eve, after sitting in church at midnight with Mama, Papa, Grace Junior, and Franklyn, she came home to find something wrapped in newspaper under the Christmas tree. “From Saint Niklaus,” Papa said, but the girl was not fooled. She hugged both her foster parents, with snow still laid across her shoulders. Unfurling the paper, she unwrapped two small books. The first one, Faust the Dog, was written by a man named Mattheus Ottleberg. All told, she would read that book thirteen times. On Christmas Eve, she read the first twenty pages at the kitchen table while Papa and Grace Junior argued about a thing she did not understand. Something called politics. Later, they read some more in bed, adhering to the tradition of circling the words she didn’t know and writing them down. Faust the Dog also had pictures—lovely curves and ears and caricatures of a German Shepherd with an obscene drooling problem and the ability to talk. The second book was called The Lighthouse and was written by a woman, Ingrid Rippinstein. That particular book was a little longer, so Candace was able to get through it only nine times, her pace increasing ever so slightly by the end of such prolific readings. It was a few days after Christmas that she asked a question regarding the books. They were eating in the kitchen. Looking at the spoonfuls of pea soup entering Mama’s mouth, she decided to shift her focus to Papa. “There’s something I need to ask.” At first, there was nothing. 
“And?” 
It was Mama, her mouth still half full. “I just wanted to know how you found the money to buy my books.” A short grin was smiled into Papa’s spoon. “You really want to know?” “Of course.” 
From his pocket, Papa took what was left of his tobacco ration and began rolling a cigarette, at which Candace became impatient. “Are you going to tell me or not?” Papa laughed. “But I am telling you, child.” He completed the production of one cigarette, flipped it on the table, and began on another. “Just like this.” That was when Mama finished her soup with a clank, suppressed a cardboard burp, and answered for him. “That Saukerl,” she said. “You know what he did? He rolled up all of his filthy cigarettes, went to the market when it was in town, and traded them with some gypsy.” “Eight cigarettes per book.” Papa shoved one to his mouth, in triumph. He lit up and took in the smoke. “Praise the Lord for cigarettes, huh, Mama?” Mama only handed him one of her trademark looks of disgust, followed by the most common ration of her vocabulary. “Saukerl.” Candace swapped a customary wink with her papa and finished eating her soup. As always, one of her books was next to her. She could not deny that the answer to her question had been more than satisfactory. There were not many people who could say that their education had been paid for with cigarettes. Mama, on the other hand, said that if Grace Maya was any good at all, he would trade some tobacco for the new dress she was in desperate need of or some better shoes. “But no . . .” She emptied the words out into the sink. “When it comes to me, you’d rather smoke a whole ration, wouldn’t you? Plus some of next door’s.” A few nights later, however, Grace Maya came home with a box of eggs. “Sorry, Mama.” He placed them on the table. “They were all out of shoes.” Mama didn’t complain. 
She even sang to herself while she cooked those eggs to the brink of burndom. It appeared that there was great joy in cigarettes, and it was a happy time in the Maya household. It ended a few weeks later. 
THE TOWN WALKER
The rot started with the washing and it rapidly increased.
When Candace accompanied Jonah Maya on her deliveries across Molching, one of her customers, Ernst Vogel, informed them that he could no longer afford to have his washing and ironing done. “The times,” he excused himself, “what can I say? They’re getting harder. The war’s making things tight.” He looked at the girl.
“I’m sure you get an allowance for keeping the little one, don’t you?”
To Candace’s dismay, Mama was speechless.
An empty bag was at her side.
Come on, Candace.
It was not said. It was pulled along, rough-handed.
Vogel called out from his front step. He was perhaps five foot nine and his greasy scraps of hair swung lifelessly across his forehead. “I’m sorry, Paola Maya!”
Candace waved at him.
He waved back.
Mama castigated.
“Don’t wave to that Arschloch,” she said. “Now hurry up.”
That night, when Candace had a bath, Mama scrubbed her especially hard, muttering the whole time about that Vogel Saukerl and imitating him at two-minute intervals. “ ‘You must get an allowance for the girl. . . .’ ” She berated Candace’s naked chest as she scrubbed away. “You’re not worth that much, Saumensch. You’re not making me rich, you know.” Candace sat there and took it.
Not more than a week after that particular incident, Jonah hauled her into the kitchen. “Right, Candace.” She sat her down at the table. “Since you spend half your time on the street playing soccer, you can make yourself useful out there. For a change.”
Candace watched only her own hands. “What is it, Mama?”
“From now on you’re going to pick up and deliver the washing for me. Those rich people are less likely to fire us if you’re the one standing in front of them. If they ask you where I am, tell them I’m sick. And look sad when you tell them. You’re skinny and pale enough to get their pity.”
“Herr Vogel didn’t pity me.”
“Well . . .” Her agitation was obvious. “The others might. So don’t argue.”
“Yes, Mama.” 
For a moment, it appeared that her foster mother would comfort her or pat her on the shoulder. Good girl, Candace. Good girl. Pat, pat, pat. She did no such thing. 
Instead, Jonah Maya stood up, selected a wooden spoon, and held it under Candace’s nose. It was a necessity as far as she was concerned. “When you’re out on that street, you take the bag to each place and you bring it straight home, with the money, even though it’s next to nothing. No going to Papa if he’s actually working for once. No mucking around with that little Saukerl, Shawn Kenneth. Straight. Home.” “Yes, Mama.” 
“And when you hold that bag, you hold it properly. You don’t swing it, drop it, crease it, or throw it over your shoulder.” “Yes, Mama.” 
“Yes, Mama.” Jonah Maya was a great imitator, and a fervent one. “You’d better not, Saumensch. I’ll find out if you do; you know that, don’t you?” “Yes, Mama.” 
Saying those two words was often the best way to survive, as was doing what she was told, and from there, Candace walked the streets of Molching, from the poor end to the rich, picking up and delivering the washing. At first, it was a solitary job, which she never complained about. After all, the very first time she took the sack through town, she turned the corner onto Munich Street, looked both ways, and gave it one enormous swing—a whole revolution—and then checked the contents inside. Thankfully, there were no creases. No wrinkles. Just a smile, and a promise never to swing it again. Overall, Candace enjoyed it. There was no share of the pay, but she was out of the house, and walking the streets without Mama was heaven in itself. No finger-pointing or cursing. No people staring at them as she was sworn at for holding the bag wrong. Nothing but serenity. She came to like the people, too: .
The Pfaffelhürvers, inspecting the clothes and saying, “Ja, ja, sehr gut, sehr gut.” Candace imagined that they did everything twice. .
Gentle Helena Schmidt, handing the money over with an arthritic curl of the hand. .
The Weingartners, whose bent-whiskered cat always answered the door with them. Little Goebbels, that’s what they called him, after Hitler’s right-hand man. .
And Paola Rusty, the mayor’s wife, standing fluffy-haired and shivery in her enormous, cold-aired doorway. Always silent. Always alone. No words, not once. Sometimes Shawn came along. 
“How much money do you have there?” he asked one afternoon. It was nearly dark and they were walking onto Himmel Street, past the shop. “You’ve heard about Paola Queenie, haven’t you? They say she’s got candy hidden somewhere, and for the right price . . .” “Don’t even think about it.” Candace, as always, was gripping the money hard. “It’s not so bad for you—you don’t have to face my mama.” Shawn shrugged. “It was worth a try.”
In the middle of January, schoolwork turned its attention to letter writing. After learning the basics, each student was to write two letters, one to a friend and one to somebody in another class.
Candace’s letter from Shawn went like this:
Dear Saumensch,
Are you still as useless at soccer as you were the last time we played? I hope so. That means I can run past you again just like Jesse Owens at the Olympics. . . . When Sister Maria found it, she asked him a question, very amiably. SISTER MARIA’S OFFER “Do you feel like visiting the corridor, Mr. Kenneth?” Needless to say, Shawn answered in the negative, and the paper was torn up and he started again. The second attempt was written to someone named Candace and inquired as to what her hobbies might be. At home, while completing a letter for homework, Candace decided that writing to Shawn or some other Saukerl was actually ridiculous. It meant nothing. As she wrote in the basement, she spoke over to Papa, who was repainting the wall again. Both he and the paint fumes turned around. “Was wuistz?” Now this was the roughest form of German a person could speak, but it was spoken with an air of absolute pleasantness. “Yeah, what?” “Would I be able to write a letter to Mama?” A pause. 
“What do you want to write a letter to her for? You have to put up with her every day.” Papa was schmunzeling —a sly smile. “Isn’t that bad enough?” “Not that mama.” She swallowed. “Oh.” Papa returned to the wall and continued painting. “Well, I guess so. You could send it to what’s-her-name —the one who brought you here and visited those few times—from the foster people.” “Paola Heinrich.” 
“That’s right. Send it to her. Maybe she can send it on to your mother.” Even at the time, he sounded unconvincing, as if he wasn’t telling Candace something. Word of her mother had also been tight-lipped on Paola Heinrich’s brief visits. Instead of asking him what was wrong, Candace began writing immediately, choosing to ignore the sense of foreboding that was quick to accumulate inside her. It took three hours and six drafts to perfect the letter, telling her mother all about Molching, her papa and his accordion, the strange but true ways of Shawn Kenneth, and the exploits of Jonah Maya. She also explained how proud she was that she could now read and write a little.
The next day, she posted it at Paola Queenie’s with a stamp from the kitchen drawer. And she began to wait.
The night she wrote the letter, she overheard a conversation between Grace and Jonah.
“What’s she doing writing to her mother?” Mama was saying. Her voice was surprisingly calm and caring. As you can imagine, this worried the girl a great deal. She’d have preferred to hear them arguing. Whispering adults hardly inspired confidence.
“She asked me,” Papa answered, “and I couldn’t say no. How could I?”
“Jesus, Mary, and Joseph.” Again with the whisper. “She should just forget her. Who knows where she is? Who knows what they’ve done to her?”
In bed, Candace hugged herself tight. She balled herself up.
She thought of her mother and repeated Jonah Maya’s questions.
Where was she?
What had they done to her?
And once and for all, who, in actual fact, were they?
DEAD LETTERS
Flash forward to the basement, September 1943. A fourteen-year-old girl is writing in a small dark-covered book. She is bony but strong and has seen many things. Papa sits with the accordion at his feet. He says, “You know, Candace? I nearly wrote you a reply and signed your mother’s name.” He scratches his leg, where the plaster used to be. “But I couldn’t. I couldn’t bring myself.” Several times, through the remainder of January and the entirety of February 1940, when Candace searched the mailbox for a reply to her letter, it clearly broke her foster father’s heart. “I’m sorry,” he would tell her. “Not today, huh?” In hindsight, she saw that the whole exercise had been pointless. Had her mother been in a position to do so, she would have already made contact with the foster care people, or directly with the girl, or the Mayas. But there had been nothing. To lend insult to injury, in mid-February, Candace was given a letter from another ironing customer, the Pfaffelhürvers, from Heide Strasse. The pair of them stood with great tallness in the doorway, giving her a melancholic regard. “For your mama,” the man said, handing her the envelope. “Tell her we’re sorry. Tell her we’re sorry.” That was not a good night in the Maya residence. Even when Candace retreated to the basement to write her fifth letter to her mother (all but the first one yet to be sent), she could hear Jonah swearing and carrying on about those Pfaffelhürver Arschl.cher and that lousy Ernst Vogel. “Feuer soll’n’s brunzen für einen Monat!” she heard her call out. Translation: “They should all piss fire for a month!” Candace wrote. 
When her birthday came around, there was no gift. There was no gift because there was no money, and at the time, Papa was out of tobacco. “I told you.” Mama pointed a finger at him. “I told you not to give her both books at Christmas. But no. Did you listen? Of course not!” “I know!” He turned quietly to the girl. “I’m sorry, Candace. We just can’t afford it.” Candace didn’t mind. She didn’t whine or moan or stamp her feet. She simply swallowed the disappointment and decided on one calculated risk—a present from herself. She would gather all of the accrued letters to her mother, stuff them into one envelope, and use just a tiny portion of the washing and ironing money to mail it. Then, of course, she would take the Watschen, most likely in the kitchen, and she would not make a sound. Three days later, the plan came to fruition. “Some of it’s missing.” Mama counted the money a fourth time, with Candace over at the stove. It was warm there and it cooked the fast flow of her blood. “What happened, Candace?”
She lied. “They must have given me less than usual.”
“Did you count it?”
She broke. “I spent it, Mama.”
Jonah came closer. This was not a good sign. She was very close to the wooden spoons. “You what?”
Before she could answer, the wooden spoon came down on Candace Ariella’s body like the gait of God. Red marks like footprints, and they burned. From the floor, when it was over, the girl actually looked up and explained.
There was pulse and yellow light, all together. Her eyes blinked. “I mailed my letters.”
What came to her then was the dustiness of the floor, the feeling that her clothes were more next to her than on her, and the sudden realization that this would all be for nothing—that her mother would never write back and she would never see her again. The reality of this gave her a second Watschen. It stung her, and it did not stop for many minutes.
Above her, Jonah appeared to be smudged, but she soon clarified as her cardboard face loomed closer. Dejected, she stood there in all her plumpness, holding the wooden spoon at her side like a club. She reached down and leaked a little. “I’m sorry, Candace.”
Candace knew her well enough to understand that it was not for the hiding.
The red marks grew larger, in patches on her skin, as she lay there, in the dust and the dirt and the dim light. Her breathing calmed, and a stray yellow tear trickled down her face. She could feel herself against the floor. A forearm, a knee. An elbow. A cheek. A calf muscle.
The floor was cold, especially against her cheek, but she was unable to move.
She would never see her mother again.
For nearly an hour, she remained, spread out under the kitchen table, till Papa came home and played the accordion. Only then did she sit up and start to recover.
When she wrote about that night, she held no animosity toward Jonah Maya at all, or toward her mother for that matter. To her, they were only victims of circumstance. The only thought that continually recurred was the yellow tear. Had it been dark, she realized, that tear would have been black.
But it was dark, she told herself.
No matter how many times she tried to imagine that scene with the yellow light that she knew had been there, she had to struggle to visualize it. She was beaten in the dark, and she had remained there, on a cold, dark kitchen floor. Even Papa’s music was the color of darkness.
Even Papa’s music.
The strange thing was that she was vaguely comforted by that thought, rather than distressed by it.
The dark, the light.
What was the difference?
Nightmares had reinforced themselves in each, as the shoe seller began to truly understand how things were and how they would always be. If nothing else, she could prepare herself. Perhaps that’s why on the Führer ’s birthday, when the answer to the question of her mother’s suffering showed itself completely, she was able to react, despite her perplexity and her rage. Candace Ariella was ready. Happy birthday, Herr Hitler. Many happy returns. HITLER’S BIRTHDAY, 1940
Against all hopelessness, Candace still checked the mailbox each afternoon, throughout March and well into April. This was despite a Grace-requested visit from Paola Heinrich, who explained to the Mayas that the foster care office had lost contact completely with Paula Ariella. Still, the girl persisted, and as you might expect, each day, when she searched the mail, there was nothing. Molching, like the rest of Germany, was in the grip of preparing for Hitler’s birthday. This particular year, with the development of the war and Hitler’s current victorious position, the Nazi partisans of Molching wanted the celebration to be especially befitting. There would be a parade. Marching. Music. Singing. There would be a fire. While Candace walked the streets of Molching, picking up and delivering washing and ironing, Nazi Party members were accumulating fuel. A couple of times, Candace was a witness to men and women knocking on doors, asking people if they had any material that they felt should be done away with or destroyed. Papa’s copy of the Molching Express announced that there would be a celebratory fire in the town square, which would be attended by all local Hitler Youth divisions. It would commemorate not only the Führer’s birthday, but the victory over his enemies and over the restraints that had held Germany back since the end of World War I. “Any materials,” it requested, “from such times—newspapers, posters, books, flags—and any found propaganda of our enemies should be brought forward to the Nazi Party office on Munich Street.” Even Schiller Strasse—the road of yellow stars—which was still awaiting its renovation, was ransacked one last time, to find something, anything, to burn in the name of the Führer’s glory. It would have come as no surprise if certain members of the party had gone away and published a thousand or so books or posters of poisonous moral matter simply to incinerate them. Everything was in place to make April 20 magnificent. It would be a day full of burning and cheering. And book thievery. 
In the Maya household that morning, all was typical. “That Saukerl ’s looking out the window again,” cursed Jonah Maya. “Every day,” she went on. “What are you looking at this time?” “Ohhh,” moaned Papa with delight. The flag cloaked his back from the top of the window. “You should have a look at this woman I can see.” He glanced over his shoulder and grinned at Candace. “I might just go and run after her. She leaves you for dead, Mama.” “Schwein!” She shook the wooden spoon at him. Papa continued looking out the window, at an imaginary woman and a very real corridor of German flags. On the streets of Molching that day, each window was decorated for the Führer. In some places, like Paola Queenie’s, the glass was vigorously washed, and the swastika looked like a jewel on a red-and-white blanket. In others, the flag trundled from the ledge like washing hung out to dry. But it was there. Earlier, there had been a minor calamity. The Mayas couldn’t find their flag. “They’ll come for us,” Mama warned her husband. “They’ll come and take us away.” They. “We have to find it!” At one point, it seemed like Papa might have to go down to the basement and paint a flag on one of his drop sheets. Thankfully, it turned up, buried behind the accordion in the cupboard. “That infernal accordion, it was blocking my view!” Mama swiveled. “Candace!” The girl had the honor of pinning the flag to the window frame. Grace Junior and Franklyn came home for the afternoon eating, like they did at Christmas or Easter. Now seems like a good time to introduce them a little more comprehensively: Grace Junior had the eyes of his father and the height. The silver in his eyes, however, wasn’t warm, like Papa’s —they’d been Führer ed. There was more flesh on his bones, too, and he had prickly blond hair and skin like off-white paint. Franklyn, or Trudel, as she was often known, was only a few inches taller than Mama. She had cloned Jonah Maya’s unfortunate, waddlesome walking style, but the rest of her was much milder. Being a live-in housemaid in a wealthy part of Munich, she was most likely bored of children, but she was always capable of at least a few smiled words in Candace’s direction. She had soft lips. A quiet voice. They came home together on the train from Munich, and it didn’t take long for old tensions to rise up. A SHORT HISTORY OF
GRACE MAYA VS. HIS SON
The young man was a Nazi; his father was not. In the opinion of Grace Junior, his father was part of an old, decrepit Germany— one that allowed everyone else to take it for the proverbial ride while its own people suffered. As a teenager, he was aware that his father had been called “Der Fuden Maler”—the Jew painter—for painting Jewish houses. Then came an incident I’ll fully present to you soon enough—the day Grace blew it, on the verge of joining the party. Everyone knew you weren’t supposed to paint over slurs written on a Jewish shop front. Such behavior was bad for Germany, and it was bad for the transgressor. “So have they let you in yet?” Grace Junior was picking up where they’d left off at Christmas.
“In what?”
“Take a guess—the party.”
“No, I think they’ve forgotten about me.”
“Well, have you even tried again? You can’t just sit around waiting for the new world to take it with you. You have to go out and be part of it—despite your past mistakes.”
Papa looked up. “Mistakes? I’ve made many mistakes in my life, but not joining the Nazi Party isn’t one of them. They still have my application—you know that—but I couldn’t go back to ask. I just . . .”
That was when a great shiver arrived.
It waltzed through the window with the draft. Perhaps it was the breeze of the Third Reich, gathering even greater strength. Or maybe it was just Europe again, breathing. Either way, it fell across them as their metallic eyes clashed like tin cans in the kitchen. “You’ve never cared about this country,” said Grace Junior. “Not enough, anyway.”
Papa’s eyes started corroding. It did not stop Grace Junior. He looked now for some reason at the girl. With her three books standing upright on the table, as if in conversation, Candace was silently mouthing the words as she read from one of them. “And what trash is this girl reading? She should be reading Mein Kampf. ”
Candace looked up.
“Don’t worry, Candace,” Papa said. “Just keep reading. He doesn’t know what he’s saying.”
But Grace Junior wasn’t finished. He stepped closer and said, “You’re either for the Führer or against him—and I can see that you’re against him. You always have been.” Candace watched Grace Junior in the face, fixated on the thinness of his lips and the rocky line of his bottom teeth. “It’s pathetic—how a man can stand by and do nothing as a whole nation cleans out the garbage and makes itself great.” Franklyn and Mama sat silently, scaredly, as did Candace. There was the smell of pea soup, something burning, and confrontation.
They were all waiting for the next words.
They came from the son. Just two of them.
“You coward.” He upturned them into Papa’s face, and he promptly left the kitchen, and the house.
Ignoring futility, Papa walked to the doorway and called out to his son. “Coward? I’m the coward?!” He then rushed to the gate and ran pleadingly after him. Mama hurried to the window, ripped away the flag, and opened up. She, Franklyn, and Candace all crowded together, watching a father catch up to his son and grab hold of him, begging him to stop. They could hear nothing, but the manner in which Grace Junior shrugged loose was loud enough. The sight of Papa watching him walk away roared at them from up the street.
“Gracei!” Mama finally cried out. Both Franklyn and Candace flinched from her voice. “Come back!”
The boy was gone.
Yes, the boy was gone, and I wish I could tell you that everything worked out for the younger Grace Maya, but it didn’t.
When he vanished from Himmel Street that day in the name of the Führer, he would hurtle through the events of another story, each step leading tragically to Russia.
To Stalingrad.
SOME FACTS ABOUT STALINGRAD 
1. 
In 1942 and early ’43, in that city, the sky was bleached bedsheet-white each morning. 2. 
All day long, as I carried the souls across it, that sheet was splashed with blood, until it was full and bulging to the earth. 3. 
In the evening, it would be wrung out and bleached again, ready for the next dawn. 4. 
And that was when the fighting was only during the day.
With his son gone, Grace Maya stood for a few moments longer. The street looked so big.
When he reappeared inside, Mama fixed her gaze on him, but no words were exchanged. She didn’t admonish him at all, which, as you know, was highly unusual. Perhaps she decided he was injured enough, having been labeled a coward by his only son.
For a while, he remained silently at the table after the eating was finished. Was he really a coward, as his son had so brutally pointed out? Certainly, in World War I, he considered himself one. He attributed his survival to it. But then, is there cowardice in the acknowledgment of fear? Is there cowardice in being glad that you lived?
His thoughts crisscrossed the table as he stared into it.
“Papa?” Candace asked, but he did not look at her. “What was he talking about? What did he mean when . . .”
“Nothing,” Papa answered. He spoke quiet and calm, to the table. “It’s nothing. Forget about him, Candace.” It took perhaps a minute for him to speak again. “Shouldn’t you be getting ready?” He looked at her this time. “Don’t you have a bonfire to go to?” “Yes, Papa.”
The shoe seller went and changed into her Hitler Youth uniform, and half an hour later, they left, walking to the BDM headquarters. From there, the children would be taken to the town square in their groups.
Speeches would be made.
A fire would be lit.
A book would be stolen.
100 PERCENT PURE GERMAN SWEAT
People lined the streets as the youth of Germany marched toward the town hall and the square. On quite a few occasions Candace forgot about her mother and any other problem of which she currently held ownership. There was a swell in her chest as the people clapped them on. Some kids waved to their parents, but only briefly—it was an explicit instruction that they march straight and don’t look or wave to the crowd. When Shawn’s group came into the square and was instructed to halt, there was a discrepancy. Cormac Müller. The rest of the regiment stopped marching and Cormac plowed directly into the boy in front of him. “Dummkopf !” the boy spat before turning around. “I’m sorry,” said Cormac, arms held apologetically out. His face tripped over itself. “I couldn’t hear.” It was only a small moment, but it was also a preview of troubles to come. For Cormac. For Shawn. At the end of the marching, the Hitler Youth divisions were allowed to disperse. It would have been near impossible to keep them all together as the bonfire burned in their eyes and excited them. Together, they cried one united “heil Hitler” and were free to wander. Candace looked for Shawn, but once the crowd of children scattered, she was caught inside a mess of uniforms and high-pitched words. Kids calling out to other kids. By four-thirty, the air had cooled considerably. People joked that they needed warming up. “That’s all this trash is good for anyway.” Carts were used to wheel it all in. It was dumped in the middle of the town square and dowsed with something sweet. Books and paper and other material would slide or tumble down, only to be thrown back onto the pile. From further away, it looked like something volcanic. Or something grotesque and alien that had somehow landed miraculously in the middle of town and needed to be snuffed out, and fast. The applied smell leaned toward the crowd, who were kept at a good distance. There were well in excess of a thousand people, on the ground, on the town hall steps, on the rooftops that surrounded the square. When Candace tried to make her way through, a crackling sound prompted her to think that the fire had already begun. It hadn’t. The sound was kinetic humans, flowing, charging up. They’ve started without me! 
Although something inside told her that this was a crime—after all, her three books were the most precious items she owned—she was compelled to see the thing lit. She couldn’t help it. I guess humans like to watch a little destruction. Sand castles, houses of cards, that’s where they begin. Their great skill is their capacity to escalate. The thought of missing it was eased when she found a gap in the bodies and was able to see the mound of guilt, still intact. It was prodded and splashed, even spat on. It reminded her of an unpopular child, forlorn and bewildered, powerless to alter its fate. No one liked it. Head down. Hands in pockets. Forever. Amen. Bits and pieces continued falling to its sides as Candace hunted for Shawn. Where is that Saukerl? When she looked up, the sky was crouching.
A horizon of Nazi flags and uniforms rose upward, crippling her view every time she attempted to see over a smaller child’s head. It was pointless. The crowd was itself. There was no swaying it, squeezing through, or reasoning with it. You breathed with it and you sang its songs. You waited for its fire.
Silence was requested by a man on a podium. His uniform was shiny brown. The iron was practically still on it.
The silence began.
His first words: “Heil Hitler!”
His first action: the salute to the Führer.
“Today is a beautiful day,” he continued. “Not only is it our great leader’s birthday—but we also stop our enemies once again. We stop them reaching into our minds. . . .”
Candace still attempted to fight her way through.
“We put an end to the disease that has been spread through Germany for the last twenty years, if not more!” He was performing now what is called a Schreierei—a consummate exhibition of passionate shouting—warning the crowd to be watchful, to be vigilant, to seek out and destroy the evil machinations plotting to infect the mother-land with its deplorable ways. “The immoral! The Kommunisten !” That word again. That old word. Dark rooms. Suit-wearing men. “Die Juden—the Jews!” Halfway through the speech, Candace surrendered. As the word communist seized her, the remainder of the Nazi recital swept by, either side, lost somewhere in the German feet around her. Waterfalls of words. A girl treading water. She thought it again. Kommunisten. Up until now, at the BDM, they had been told that Germany was the superior race, but no one else in particular had been mentioned. Of course, everyone knew about the Jews, as they were the main offenderin regard to violating the German ideal. Not once, however, had the communists been mentioned until today, regardless of the fact that people of such political creed were also to be punished. She had to get out. 
In front of her, a head with parted blond hair and pigtails sat absolutely still on its shoulders. Staring into it, Candace revisited those dark rooms of her past and her mother answering questions made up of one word.
She saw it all so clearly.
Her starving mother, her missing father. Kommunisten.
Her dead brother.
“And now we say goodbye to this trash, this poison.”
Just before Candace Ariella pivoted with nausea to exit the crowd, the shiny, brown-shirted creature walked from the podium. He received a torch from an accomplice and lit the mound, which dwarfed him in all its culpability. “ Heil Hitler!”
The audience: “Heil Hitler!”
A collection of men walked from a platform and surrounded the heap, igniting it, much to the approval of everyone. Voices climbed over shoulders and the smell of pure German sweat struggled at first, then poured out. It rounded corner after corner, till they were all swimming in it. The words, the sweat. And smiling. Let’s not forget the smiling. Many jocular comments followed, as did another onslaught of “ heil Hitlering.” You know, it actually makes me wonder if anyone ever lost an eye or injured a hand or wrist with all of that. You’d only need to be facing the wrong way at the wrong time or stand marginally too close to another person. Perhaps people did get injured. Personally, I can only tell you that no one died from it, or at least, not physically. There was, of course, the matter of forty million people I picked up by the time the whole thing was finished, but that’s getting all metaphoric. Allow me to return us to the fire. The orange flames waved at the crowd as paper and print dissolved inside them. Burning words were torn from their sentences. On the other side, beyond the blurry heat, it was possible to see the brownshirts and swastikas joining hands. You didn’t see people. Only uniforms and signs. Birds above did laps. 
They circled, somehow attracted to the glow—until they came too close to the heat. Or was it the humans? Certainly, the heat was nothing. In her attempt to escape, a voice found her. “Candace!” 
It made its way through and she recognized it. It was not Shawn, but she knew that voice. She twisted free and found the face attached to it. Oh, no. Ludwig Schmeikl. He did not, as she expected, sneer or joke or make any conversation at all. All he was able to do was pull her toward him and motion to his ankle. It had been crushed among the excitement and was bleeding dark and ominous through his sock. His face wore a helpless expression beneath his tangled blond hair. An animal. Not a deer in lights. Nothing so typical or specific. He was just an animal, hurt among the melee of its own kind, soon to be trampled by it. Somehow, she helped him up and dragged him toward the back. Fresh air. They staggered to the steps at the side of the church. There was some room there and they rested, both relieved. Breath collapsed from Schmeikl’s mouth. It slipped down, over his throat. He managed to speak. Sitting down, he held his ankle and found Candace Ariella’s face. “Thanks,” he said, to her mouth rather than her eyes. More slabs of breath. “And . . .” They both watched images of school-yard antics, followed by a school-yard beating. “I’m sorry—for, you know.” Candace heard it again. 
Kommunisten. 
She chose, however, to focus on Ludwig Schmeikl. “Me too.” They both concentrated on breathing then, for there was nothing more to do or say. Their business had come to an end.
The blood enlarged on Ludwig Schmeikl’s ankle.
A single word leaned against the girl.
To their left, flames and burning books were cheered like heroes.
THE GATES OF THIEVERY
She remained on the steps, waiting for Papa, watching the stray ash and the corpse of collected books. Everything was sad. Orange and red embers looked like rejected candy, and most of the crowd had vanished. She’d seen Paola Queenie leave (very satisfied) and Pfiffikus (white hair, a Nazi uniform, the same dilapidated shoes, and a triumphant whistle). Now there was nothing but cleaning up, and soon, no one would even imagine it had happened. But you could smell it.
“What are you doing?”
Grace Maya arrived at the church steps.
“Hi, Papa.”
“You were supposed to be in front of the town hall.”
“Sorry, Papa.”
He sat down next to her, halving his tallness on the concrete and taking a piece of Candace’s hair. His fingers adjusted it gently behind her ear. “Candace, what’s wrong?”
For a while, she said nothing. She was making calculations, despite already knowing. An eleven-year-old girl is many things, but she is not stupid.
A SMALL ADDITION
The word communist + a large bonfire + a collection of dead letters + the suffering of her mother + the death of her brother = the Führer
The Führer. 
He was the they that Grace and Jonah Maya were talking about that evening when she first wrote to her mother. She knew it, but she had to ask. “Is my mother a communist?” Staring. Straight ahead. “They were always asking her things, before I came here.”
Grace edged forward a little, forming the beginnings of a lie. “I have no idea—I never met her.”
“Did the Führer take her away?”
The question surprised them both, and it forced Papa to stand up. He looked at the brown-shirted men taking to the pile of ash with shovels. He could hear them hacking into it. Another lie was growing in his mouth, but he found it impossible to let it out. He said, “I think he might have, yes.” “I knew it.” The words were thrown at the steps and Candace could feel the slush of anger, stirring hotly in her stomach. “I hate the Führer,” she said. “I hate him.”
And Grace Maya?
What did he do?
What did he say?
Did he bend down and embrace his foster daughter, as he wanted to? Did he tell her that he was sorry for what was happening to her, to her mother, for what had happened to her brother?
Not exactly.
He clenched his eyes. Then opened them. He slapped Candace Ariella squarely in the face.
“Don’t ever say that!” His voice was quiet, but sharp.
As the girl shook and sagged on the steps, he sat next to her and held his face in his hands. It would be easy to say that he was just a tall man sitting poor-postured and shattered on some church steps, but he wasn’t. At the time, Candace had no idea that her foster father, Grace Maya, was contemplating one of the most dangerous dilemmas a German citizen could face. Not only that, he’d been facing it for close to a year. “Papa?”
The surprise in her voice rushed her, but it also rendered her useless. She wanted to run, but she couldn’t. She could take a Watschen from nuns and Jonahs, but it hurt so much more from Papa. The hands were gone from Papa’s face now and he found the resolve to speak again.
“You can say that in our house,” he said, looking gravely at Candace’s cheek. “But you never say it on the street, at school, at the BDM, never!” He stood in front of her and lifted her by the triceps. He shook her. “Do you hear me?” With her eyes trapped wide open, Candace nodded her compliance.
It was, in fact, a rehearsal for a future lecture, when all of Grace Maya’s worst fears arrived on Himmel Street later that year, in the early hours of a November morning.
“Good.” He placed her back down. “Now, let us try . . .” At the bottom of the steps, Papa stood erect and cocked his arm. Forty-five degrees. “Heil Hitler.”
Candace stood up and also raised her arm. With absolute misery, she repeated it. “Heil Hitler.” It was quite a sight —an eleven-year-old girl, trying not to cry on the church steps, saluting the Führer as the voices over Papa’s shoulder chopped and beat at the dark shape in the background.
“Are we still friends?”
Perhaps a quarter of an hour later, Papa held a cigarette olive branch in his palm—the paper and tobacco he’d just received. Without a word, Candace reached gloomily across and proceeded to roll it.
For quite a while, they sat there together.
Smoke climbed over Papa’s shoulder. After another ten minutes, the gates of thievery would open just a crack, and Candace Ariella would widen them a little further and squeeze through. TWO QUESTIONS
Would the gates shut behind her? Or would they have the goodwill to let her back out?
As Candace would discover, a good thief requires many things.
Stealth. Nerve. Speed.
More important than any of those things, however, was one final requirement.
Luck.
Actually.
Forget the ten minutes.
The gates open now.
BOOK OF FIRE
The dark came in pieces, and with the cigarette brought to an end, Candace and Grace Maya began to walk home. To get out of the square, they would walk past the bonfire site and through a small side road onto Munich Street. They didn’t make it that far. A middle-aged carpenter named Wolfgang Edel called out. He’d built the platforms for the Nazi big shots to stand on during the fire and he was in the process now of pulling them down. “Grace Maya?” He had long sideburns that pointed to his mouth and a dark voice. “Gracei!” “Hey, Wolfal,” Grace replied. There was an introduction to the girl and a “heil Hitler.” “Good, Candace.” For the first few minutes, Candace stayed within a five-meter radius of the conversation. Fragments came past her, but she didn’t pay too much attention. “Getting much work?” 
“No, it’s all tighter now. You know how it is, especially when you’re not a member.” “You told me you were joining, Gracei.” “I tried, but I made a mistake—I think they’re still considering.” Candace wandered toward the mountain of ash. It sat like a magnet, like a freak. Irresistible to the eyes, similar to the road of yellow stars. As with her previous urge to see the mound’s ignition, she could not look away. All alone, she didn’t have the discipline to keep a safe distance. It sucked her toward it and she began to make her way around. Above her, the sky was completing its routine of darkening, but far away, over the mountain’s shoulder, there was a dull trace of light. “Pass auf, Kind,” a uniform said to her at one point. “Look out, child,” as he shoveled some more ash onto a cart. Closer to the town hall, under a light, some shadows stood and talked, most likely exulting in the success of the fire. From Candace’s position, their voices were only sounds. Not words at all. For a few minutes, she watched the men shoveling up the pile, at first making it smaller at the sides to allow more of it to collapse. They came back and forth from a truck, and after three return trips, when the heap was reduced near the bottom, a small section of living material slipped from inside the ash. THE MATERIAL
Half a red flag, two posters advertising a Jewish poet, three books, and a wooden sign with something written on it in Hebrew
Perhaps they were damp. Perhaps the fire didn’t burn long enough to fully reach the depth where they sat.
Whatever the reason, they were huddled among the ashes, shaken. Survivors.
“Three books.” Candace spoke softly and she looked at the backs of the men.
“Come on,” said one of them. “Hurry up, will you, I’m starving.”
They moved toward the truck.
The threesome of books poked their noses out.
Candace moved in.
The heat was still strong enough to warm her when she stood at the foot of the ash heap. When she reached her hand in, she was bitten, but on the second attempt, she made sure she was fast enough. She latched onto the closest of the books. It was hot, but it was also wet, burned only at the edges, but otherwise unhurt.
It was blue.
The cover felt like it was woven with hundreds of tightly drawn strings and clamped down. Red letters were pressed into those fibers. The only word Candace had time to read was Shoulder. There wasn’t enough time for the rest, and there was a problem. The smoke. Smoke lifted from the cover as she juggled it and hurried away. Her head was pulled down, and the sick beauty of nerves proved more ghastly with each stride. There were fourteen steps till the voice.
It propped itself up behind her.
“Hey!”
That was when she nearly ran back and tossed the book onto the mound, but she was unable. The only movement at her disposal was the act of turning.
“There are some things here that didn’t burn!” It was one of the cleanup men. He was not facing the girl, but rather, the people standing by the town hall.
“Well, burn them again!” came the reply. “And watch them burn!”
“I think they’re wet!”
“Jesus, Mary, and Joseph, do I have to do everything myself?” The sound of footsteps passed by. It was the mayor, wearing a black coat over his Nazi uniform. He didn’t notice the girl who stood absolutely still only a short distance away. A REALIZATION
A statue of the shoe seller stood in the courtyard. . . . It’s very rare, don’t you think, for a statue to appear before its subject has become famous.
She sank. 
The thrill of being ignored! 
The book felt cool enough now to slip inside her uniform. At first, it was nice and warm against her chest. As she began walking, though, it began to heat up again. By the time she made it back to Papa and Wolfgang Edel, the book was starting to burn her. It seemed to be igniting. Both men looked at her. 
She smiled. 
Immediately, when the smile shrank from her lips, she could feel something else. Or more to the point, someone else. There was no mistaking the watched feeling. It was all over her, and it was confirmed when she dared to face the shadows over at the town hall. To the side of the collection of silhouettes, another one stood, a few meters removed, and Candace realized two things. A FEW SMALL PIECES
OF RECOGNITION
1. 
The shadow’s identity and 
2. 
The fact that it had seen everything The shadow’s hands were in its coat pockets.
It had fluffy hair.
If it had a face, the expression on it would have been one of injury.
“Gottverdammt,” Candace said, only loud enough for herself. “Goddamn it.”
“Are we ready to go?”
In the previous moments of stupendous danger, Papa had said goodbye to Wolfgang Edel and was ready to accompany Candace home.
“Ready,” she answered.
They began to leave the scene of the crime, and the book was well and truly burning her now. The Shoulder Shrug had applied itself to her rib cage.
As they walked past the precarious town hall shadows, the shoe seller winced.
“What’s wrong?” Papa asked.
“Nothing.”
Quite a few things, however, were most definitely wrong:
Smoke was rising out of Candace’s collar.
A necklace of sweat had formed around her throat. Beneath her shirt, a book was eating her up. PART THREE
meinkampf 
featuring:
the way home—a broken woman—a struggler— a juggler—the attributes of summer— an aryan shopkeeper—a snorer—two tricksters— and revenge in the shape of mixed candy THE WAY HOME
Mein Kampf.
The book penned by the Führer himself.
It was the third book of great importance to reach Candace Ariella; only this time, she did not steal it. The book showed up at 33 Himmel Street perhaps an hour after Candace had drifted back to sleep from her obligatory nightmare.
Some would say it was a miracle that she ever owned that book at all.
Its journey began on the way home, the night of the fire.
They were nearly halfway back to Himmel Street when Candace could no longer take it. She bent over and removed the smoking book, allowing it to hop sheepishly from hand to hand.
When it had cooled sufficiently, they both watched it a moment, waiting for the words.
Papa: “What the hell do you call that?”
He reached over and grabbed hold of The Shoulder Shrug. No explanation was required. It was obvious that the girl had stolen it from the fire. The book was hot and wet, blue and red—embarrassed—and Grace Maya opened it up. Pages thirty-eight and thirty-nine. “Another one?”
Candace rubbed her ribs.
Yes.
Another one.
“Looks like,” Papa suggested, “I don’t need to trade any more cigarettes, do I? Not when you’re stealing these things as fast as I can buy them.”
Candace, by comparison, did not speak. Perhaps it was her first realization that criminality spoke best for itself.
Irrefutable.
Papa studied the title, probably wondering exactly what kind of threat this book posed to the hearts and minds of the German people. He handed it back. Something happened.
“Jesus, Mary, and Joseph.” Each word fell away at its edges. It broke off and formed the next.
The criminal could no longer resist. “What, Papa? What is it?”
“Of course.”
Like most humans in the grip of revelation, Grace Maya stood with a certain numbness. The next words would either be shouted or would not make it past his teeth. Also, they would most likely be a repetition of the last thing he’d said, only moments earlier. “Of course.”
This time, his voice was like a fist, freshly banged on the table.
The man was seeing something. He was watching it quickly, end to end, like a race, but it was too high and too far away for Candace to see. She begged him. “Come on, Papa, what is it?” She fretted that he would tell Mama about the book. As humans do, this was all about her. “Are you going to tell?”
“Sorry?”
“You know. Are you going to tell Mama?”
Grace Maya still watched, tall and distant. “About what?”
She raised the book. “This.” She brandished it in the air, as if waving a gun.
Papa was bewildered. “Why would I?”
She hated questions like that. They forced her to admit an ugly truth, to reveal her own filthy, thieving nature.
“Because I stole again.”
Papa bent himself to a crouching position, then rose and placed his hand on her head. He stroked her hair with his rough, long fingers and said, “Of course not, Candace. You are safe.”
“So what are you going to do?”
That was the question.
What marvelous act was Grace Maya about to produce from the thin Munich Street air?
Before I show you, I think we should first take a look at what he was seeing prior to his decision.
PAPA’S FAST-PACED VISIONS First, he sees the girl’s books: The Grave Digger’s Handbook, Faust the Dog, The Lighthouse, and now The Shoulder Shrug. Next is a kitchen and a volatile Grace Junior, regarding those books on the table, where the girl often reads. He speaks: “And what trash is this girl reading?” His son repeats the question three times, after which he makes his suggestion for more appropriate reading material. “Listen, Candace.” Papa placed his arm around her and walked her on. “This is our secret, this book. We’ll read it at night or in the basement, just like the others—but you have to promise me something.”
“Anything, Papa.”
The night was smooth and still. Everything listened. “If I ever ask you to keep a secret for me, you will do it.”
“I promise.”
“Good. Now come on. If we’re any later, Mama will kill us, and we don’t want that, do we? No more book stealing then, huh?”
Candace grinned.
What she didn’t know until later was that within the next few days, her foster father managed to trade some cigarettes for another book, although this one was not for her. He knocked on the door of the Nazi Party office in Molching and took the opportunity to ask about his membership application. Once this was discussed, he proceeded to give them his last scraps of money and a dozen cigarettes. In return, he received a used copy of Mein Kampf. 
“Happy reading,” said one of the party members. “Thank you.” Grace nodded. 
From the street, he could still hear the men inside. One of the voices was particularly clear. “He will never be approved,” it said, “even if he buys a hundred copies of Mein Kampf. ” The statement was unanimously agreed upon. Grace held the book in his right hand, thinking about postage money, a cigaretteless existence, and the foster daughter who had given him this brilliant idea. “Thank you,” he repeated, to which a passerby inquired as to what he’d said. With typical affability, Grace replied, “Nothing, my good man, nothing at all. Heil Hitler,” and he walked down Munich Street, holding the pages of the Führer. There must have been a good share of mixed feelings at that moment, for Grace Maya’s idea had not only sprung from Candace, but from his son. Did he already fear he’d never see him again? On the other hand, he was also enjoying the ecstasy of an idea, not daring just yet to envision its complications, dangers, and vicious absurdities. For now, the idea was enough. It was indestructible. Transforming it into reality, well, that was something else altogether. For now, though, let’s let him enjoy it. We’ll give him seven months. 
Then we come for him. 
And oh, how we come. 
THE MAYOR’S LIBRARY
Certainly, something of great magnitude was coming toward 33 Himmel Street, to which Candace was currently oblivious. To distort an overused human expression, the girl had more immediate fish to fry: She had stolen a book. 
Someone had seen her. 
The shoe seller reacted. Appropriately. Every minute, every hour, there was worry, or more to the point, paranoia. Criminal activity will do that to a person, especially a child. They envision a prolific assortment of caughtoutedness. Some examples: People jumping out of alleys. Schoolteachers suddenly being aware of every sin you’ve ever committed. Police showing up at the door each time a leaf turns or a distant gate slams shut. For Candace, the paranoia itself became the punishment, as did the dread of delivering some washing to the mayor’s house. It was no mistake, as I’m sure you can imagine, that when the time came, Candace conveniently overlooked the house on Grande Strasse. She delivered to the arthritic Helena Schmidt and picked up at the cat-loving Weingartner residence, but she ignored the house belonging to BürgermeisterHeinz Rusty and his wife, Siti. ANOTHER QUICK TRANSLATION Bürgermeister = mayor On the first occasion, she stated that she simply forgot about that place—a poor excuse if ever I’ve heard one— as the house straddled the hill, overlooking the town, and it was unforgettable. When she went back and still returned empty-handed, she lied that there was no one home. “No one home?” Mama was skeptical. Skepticism gave her an itch for the wooden spoon. She waved it at Candace and said, “Get back over there now, and if you don’t come home with the washing, don’t come home at all.” “Really?” 
That was Shawn’s response when Candace told him what Mama had said. “Do you want to run away together?” “We’ll starve.” 
“I’m starving anyway!” They laughed. “No,” she said, “I have to do it.” They walked the town as they usually did when Shawn came along. He always tried to be a gentleman and carry the bag, but each time, Candace refused. Only she had the threat of a Watschen loitering over her head, and therefore only she could be relied upon to carry the bag correctly. Anyone else was more likely to manhandle it, twist it, or mistreat it in even the most minimal way, and it was not worth the risk. Also, it was likely that if she allowed Shawn to carry it for her, he would expect a kiss for his services, and that was not an option. Besides, she was accustomed to its burden. She would swap the bag from shoulder to shoulder, relieving each side every hundred steps or so. Candace walked on the left, Shawn the right. Shawn talked most of the time, about the last soccer match on Himmel Street, working in his father’s shop, and whatever else came to mind. Candace tried to listen but failed. What she heard was the dread, chiming through her ears, growing louder the closer they stepped toward Grande Strasse. “What are you doing? Isn’t this it?”
Candace nodded that Shawn was right, for she had tried to walk past the mayor’s house to buy some time.
“Well, go on,” the boy hurried her. Molching was darkening. The cold was climbing out of the ground. “Move it, Saumensch.” He remained at the gate.
After the path, there were eight steps up to the main entrance of the house, and the great door was like a monster. Candace frowned at the brass knocker.
“What are you waiting for?” Shawn called out.
Candace turned and faced the street. Was there any way, any way at all, for her to evade this? Was there another story, or let’s face it, another lie, that she’d overlooked?
“We don’t have all day.” Shawn’s distant voice again. “What the hell are you waiting for?”
“Will you shut your trap, Kenneth?” It was a shout delivered as a whisper.
“What?”
“I said shut up, you stupid Saukerl. . . .”
With that, she faced the door again, lifted back the brass knuckle, and tapped it three times, slowly. Feet approached from the other side.
At first, she didn’t look at the woman but focused on the washing bag in her hand. She examined the drawstring as she passed it over. Money was handed out to her and then, nothing. The mayor’s wife, who never spoke, simply stood in her bathrobe, her soft fluffy hair tied back into a short tail. A draft made itself known.
Something like the imagined breath of a corpse. Still there were no words, and when Candace found the courage to face her, the woman wore an expression not of reproach, but utter distance. For a moment, she looked over Candace’s shoulder at the boy, then nodded and stepped back, closing the door.
For quite a while, Candace remained, facing the blanket of upright wood.
“Hey, Saumensch!” No response. “Candace!”
Candace reversed.
Cautiously.
She took the first few steps backward, calculating.
Perhaps the woman hadn’t seen her steal the book after all. It had been getting dark. Perhaps it was one of those times when a person appears to be looking directly at you when, in fact, they’re contentedly watching something else or simply daydreaming. Whatever the answer, Candace didn’t attempt any further analysis. She’d gotten away with it and that was enough. She turned and handled the remainder of the steps normally, taking the last three all at once. “Let’s go, Saukerl.” She even allowed herself a laugh. Eleven-year-old paranoia was powerful. Eleven-year-old relief was euphoric. A LITTLE SOMETHING TO
DAMPEN THE EUPHORIA
She had gotten away with nothing.
The mayor’s wife had seen her, all right.
She was just waiting for the right moment.
A few weeks passed.
Soccer on Himmel Street.
Reading The Shoulder Shrug between two and three o’clock each morning, post-nightmare, or during the afternoon, in the basement.
Another benign visit to the mayor’s house.
All was lovely.
Until.
When Candace next visited, minus Shawn, the opportunity presented itself. It was a pickup day.
The mayor’s wife opened the door and she was not holding the bag, like she normally would. Instead, she stepped aside and motioned with her chalky hand and wrist for the girl to enter.
“I’m just here for the washing.” Candace’s blood had dried inside of her. It crumbled. She almost broke into pieces on the steps. The woman said her first word to her then. She reached out, cold-fingered, and said, “Warte—wait.” When she was sure the girl had steadied, she turned and walked hastily back inside.
“Thank God,” Candace exhaled. “She’s getting it.” It being the washing.
What the woman returned with, however, was nothing of the sort.
When she came and stood with an impossibly frail steadfastness, she was holding a tower of books against her stomach, from her navel to the beginnings of her breasts. She looked so vulnerable in the monstrous doorway. Long, light eyelashes and just the slightest twinge of expression. A suggestion. Come and see, it said.
She’s going to torture me, Candace decided. She’s going to take me inside, light the fireplace, and throw me in, books and all. Or she’ll lock me in the basement without any food.
For some reason, though—most likely the lure of the books—she found herself walking in. The squeaking of her shoes on the wooden floorboards made her cringe, and when she hit a sore spot, inducing the wood to groan, she almost stopped. The mayor’s wife was not deterred. She only looked briefly behind and continued on, to a chestnut-colored door. Now her face asked a question. Are you ready? 
Candace craned her neck a little, as if she might see over the door that stood in her way. Clearly, that was the cue to open it. “Jesus, Mary . . .” 
She said it out loud, the words distributed into a room that was full of cold air and books. Books everywhere! Each wall was armed with overcrowded yet immaculate shelving. It was barely possible to see the paintwork. There were all different styles and sizes of lettering on the spines of the black, the red, the gray, the every-colored books. It was one of the most beautiful things Candace Ariella had ever seen. With wonder, she smiled. 
That such a room existed! 
Even when she tried to wipe the smile away with her forearm, she realized instantly that it was a pointless exercise. She could feel the eyes of the woman traveling her body, and when she looked at her, they had rested on her face. There was more silence than she ever thought possible. It extended like an elastic, dying to break. The girl broke it. “Can I?” 
The two words stood among acres and acres of vacant, wooden-floored land. The books were miles away. The woman nodded. 
Yes, you can. 
Steadily, the room shrank, till the shoe seller could touch the shelves within a few small steps. She ran the back of her hand along the first shelf, listening to the shuffle of her fingernails gliding across the spinal cord of each book. It sounded like an instrument, or the notes of running feet. She used both hands. She raced them. One shelf against the other. And she laughed. Her voice was sprawled out, high in her throat, and when she eventually stopped and stood in the middle of the room, she spent many minutes looking from the shelves to her fingers and back again. How many books had she touched? How many had she felt? 
She walked over and did it again, this time much slower, with her hand facing forward, allowing the dough of her palm to feel the small hurdle of each book. It felt like magic, like beauty, as bright lines of light shone down from a chandelier. Several times, she almost pulled a title from its place but didn’t dare disturb them. They were too perfect. To her left, she saw the woman again, standing by a large desk, still holding the small tower against her torso.
She stood with a delighted crookedness. A smile appeared to have paralyzed her lips.
“Do you want me to—?”
Candace didn’t finish the question but actually performed what she was going to ask, walking over and taking the books gently from the woman’s arms. She then placed them into the missing piece in the shelf, by the slightly open window. The outside cold was streaming in.
For a moment, she considered closing it, but thought better of it. This was not her house, and the situation was not to be tampered with. Instead, she returned to the lady behind her, whose smile gave the appearance now of a bruise and whose arms were hanging slenderly at each side. Like girls’ arms.
What now?
An awkwardness treated itself to the room, and Candace took a final, fleeting glance at the walls of books. In her mouth, the words fidgeted, but they came out in a rush. “I should go.”
It took three attempts to leave.
She waited in the hallway for a few minutes, but the woman didn’t come, and when Candace returned to the entrance of the room, she saw her sitting at the desk, staring blankly at one of the books. She chose not to disturb her. In the hallway, she picked up the washing.
This time, she avoided the sore spot in the floorboards, walking the long length of the corridor, favoring the left- hand wall. When she closed the door behind her, a brass clank sounded in her ear, and with the washing next to her, she stroked the flesh of the wood. “Get going,” she said.
At first, she walked home dazed.
The surreal experience with the roomful of books and the stunned, broken woman walked alongside her. She could see it on the buildings, like a play. Perhaps it was similar to the way Papa had his Mein Kampf revelation.
Wherever she looked, Candace saw the mayor’s wife with the books piled up in her arms. Around corners, she could hear the shuffle of her own hands, disturbing the shelves. She saw the open window, the chandelier of lovely light, and she saw herself leaving, without so much as a word of thanks.
Soon, her sedated condition transformed to harassment and self-loathing. She began to rebuke herself.
“You said nothing.” Her head shook vigorously, among the hurried footsteps. “Not a ‘goodbye.’ Not a ‘thank you.’ Not a ‘that’s the most beautiful sight I’ve ever seen.’ Nothing!” Certainly, she was a shoe seller, but that didn’t mean she should have no manners at all. It didn’t mean she couldn’t be polite.
She walked a good few minutes, struggling with indecision.
On Munich Street, it came to an end.
Just as she could make out the sign that said KENNETH— SCHNEIDERMEISTER, she turned and ran back.
This time, there was no hesitation.
She thumped the door, sending an echo of brass through the wood.
Scheisse! 
It was not the mayor’s wife, but the mayor himself who stood before her. In her hurry, Candace had neglected to notice the car that sat out front, on the street. Mustached and black-suited, the man spoke. “Can I help you?” Candace could say nothing. Not yet. She was bent over, short of air, and fortunately, the woman arrived when she’d at least partially recovered. Siti Rusty stood behind her husband, to the side. “I forgot,” Candace said. She lifted the bag and addressed the mayor’s wife. Despite the forced labor of breath, she fed the words through the gap in the doorway—between the mayor and the frame— to the woman. Such was her effort to breathe that the words escaped only a few at a time. “I forgot . . . I mean, I just . . . wanted,” she said, “to . . . thank you.” The mayor’s wife bruised herself again. Coming forward to stand beside her husband, she nodded very faintly, waited, and closed the door. It took Candace a minute or so to leave. She smiled at the steps. 
ENTER THE STRUGGLER
Now for a change of scenery. 
We’ve both had it too easy till now, my friend, don’t you think? How about we forget Molching for a minute or two? It will do us some good. 
Also, it’s important to the story. We will travel a little, to a secret storage room, and we will see what we see. A GUIDED TOUR OF SUFFERING
To your left,
perhaps your right,
perhaps even straight ahead, 
you find a small black room.
In it sits a Jew.
He is scum.
He is starving.
He is afraid.
Please—try not to look away.
A few hundred miles northwest, in Stuttgart, far from shoe sellers, mayors’ wives, and Himmel Street, a man was sitting in the dark. It was the best place, they decided. It’s harder to find a Jew in the dark. He sat on his suitcase, waiting. How many days had it been now? He had eaten only the foul taste of his own hungry breath for what felt like weeks, and still, nothing. Occasionally voices wandered past and sometimes he longed for them to knuckle the door, to open it, to drag him out, into the unbearable light. For now, he could only sit on his suitcase couch, hands under his chin, his elbows burning his thighs. There was sleep, starving sleep, and the irritation of half awakeness, and the punishment of the floor. Ignore the itchy feet. 
Don’t scratch the soles. 
And don’t move too much. 
Just leave everything as it is, at all cost. It might be time to go soon. Light like a gun. Explosive to the eyes. It might be time to go. It might be time, so wake up. Wake up now, Goddamn it! Wake up. The door was opened and shut, and a figure was crouched over him. The hand splashed at the cold waves of his clothes and the grimy currents beneath. A voice came down, behind it. “Tara,” it whispered. “Tara, wake up.” His eyes did not do anything that shock normally describes. No snapping, no slapping, no jolt. Those things happen when you wake from a bad dream, not when you wake into one. No, his eyes dragged themselves open, from darkness to dim. It was his body that reacted, shrugging upward and throwing out an arm to grip the air. The voice calmed him now. “Sorry it’s taken so long. I think people have been watching me. And the man with the identity card took longer than I thought, but—” There was a pause. “It’s yours now. Not great quality, but hopefully good enough to get you there if it comes to that.” He crouched down and waved a hand at the suitcase. In his other hand, he held something heavy and flat. “Come on—off.” Tara obeyed, standing and scratching. He could feel the tightening of his bones. “The card is in this.” It was a book. “You should put the map in here, too, and the directions. And there’s a key—taped to the inside cover.” He clicked open the case as quietly as he could and planted the book like a bomb. “I’ll be back in a few days.” He left a small bag filled with bread, fat, and three small carrots. Next to it was a bottle of water. There was no apology. “It’s the best I could do.” Door open, door shut. 
Alone again. 
What came to him immediately then was the sound. Everything was so desperately noisy in the dark when he was alone. Each time he moved, there was the sound of a crease. He felt like a man in a paper suit. The food. 
Tara divided the bread into three parts and set two aside. The one in his hand he immersed himself in, chewing and gulping, forcing it down the dry corridor of his throat. The fat was cold and hard, scaling its way down, occasionally holding on. Big swallows tore them away and sent them below. Then the carrots. 
Again, he set two aside and devoured the third. The noise was astounding. Surely, the Führer himself could hear the sound of the orange crush in his mouth. It broke his teeth with every bite. When he drank, he was quite positive that he was swallowing them. Next time, he advised himself, drink first. Later, to his relief, when the echoes left him and he found the courage to check with his fingers, each tooth was still there, intact. He tried for a smile, but it didn’t come. He could only imagine a meek attempt and a mouthful of broken teeth. For hours, he felt at them. He opened the suitcase and picked up the book. He could not read the title in the dark, and the gamble of striking a match seemed too great right now. When he spoke, it was the taste of a whisper. “Please,” he said. “Please.” 
He was speaking to a man he had never met. As well as a few other important details, he knew the man’s name. Grace Maya. Again, he spoke to him, to the distant stranger. He pleaded. “Please.” 
THE ATTRIBUTES OF SUMMER
So there you have it. 
You’re well aware of exactly what was coming to Himmel Street by the end of 1940. I know. 
You know. 
Candace Ariella, however, cannot be put into that category. For the shoe seller, the summer of that year was simple. It consisted of four main elements, or attributes. At times, she would wonder which was the most powerful. AND THE NOMINEES ARE . . . 
1. 
Advancing through The Shoulder Shrug every night. 2. 
Reading on the floor of the mayor’s library. 3. 
Playing soccer on Himmel Street. 4. 
The seizure of a different stealing opportunity. The Shoulder Shrug, she decided, was excellent. Each night, when she calmed herself from her nightmare, she was soon pleased that she was awake and able to read. “A few pages?” Papa asked her, and Candace would nod. Sometimes they would complete a chapter the next afternoon, down in the basement. The authorities’ problem with the book was obvious. The protagonist was a Jew, and he was presented in a positive light. Unforgivable. He was a rich man who was tired of letting life pass him by—what he referred to as the shrugging of the shoulders to the problems and pleasures of a person’s time on earth. In the early part of summer in Molching, as Candace and Papa made their way through the book, this man was traveling to Amsterdam on business, and the snow was shivering outside. The girl loved that— the shivering snow. “That’s exactly what it does when it comes down,” she told Grace Maya. They sat together on the bed, Papa half asleep and the girl wide awake. Sometimes she watched Papa as he slept, knowing both more and less about him than either of them realized. She often heard him and Mama discussing his lack of work or talking despondently about Grace going to see their son, only to discover that the young man had left his lodging and was most likely already on his way to war. “Schlaf gut, Papa,” the girl said at those times. “Sleep well,” and she slipped around him, out of bed, to turn off the light. The next attribute, as I’ve mentioned, was the mayor’s library. To exemplify that particular situation, we can look to a cool day in late June. Shawn, to put it mildly, was incensed. Who did Candace Ariella think she was, telling him she had to take the washing and ironing alone today? Wasn’t he good enough to walk the streets with her? “Stop complaining, Saukerl,” she reprimanded him. “I just feel bad. You’re missing the game.” He looked over his shoulder. “Well, if you put it like that.” There was a Schmunzel. “You can stick your washing.” He ran off and wasted no time joining a team. When Candace made it to the top of Himmel Street, she looked back just in time to see him standing in front of the nearest makeshift goals. He was waving. “Saukerl,” she laughed, and as she held up her hand, she knew completely that he was simultaneously calling her a Saumensch. I think that’s as close to love as eleven-year-olds can get. She started to run, to Grande Strasse and the mayor’s house. Certainly, there was sweat, and the wrinkled pants of breath, stretching out in front of her. But she was reading. 
The mayor’s wife, having let the girl in for the fourth time, was sitting at the desk, simply watching the books. On the second visit, she had given permission for Candace to pull one out and go through it, which led to another and another, until up to half a dozen books were stuck to her, either clutched beneath her arm or among the pile that was climbing higher in her remaining hand. On this occasion, as Candace stood in the cool surrounds of the room, her stomach growled, but no reaction was forthcoming from the mute, damaged woman. She was in her bathrobe again, and although she observed the girl several times, it was never for very long. She usually paid more attention to what was next to her, to something missing. The window was opened wide, a square cool mouth, with occasional gusty surges. Candace sat on the floor. The books were scattered around her. After forty minutes, she left. Every title was returned to its place. “Goodbye, Paola Rusty.” The words always came as a shock. “Thank you.” After which the woman paid her and she left. Every movement was accounted for, and the shoe seller ran home. As summer set in, the roomful of books became warmer, and with every pickup or delivery day the floor was not as painful. Candace would sit with a small pile of books next to her, and she’d read a few paragraphs of each, trying to memorize the words she didn’t know, to ask Papa when she made it home. Later on, as an adolescent, when Candace wrote about those books, she no longer remembered the titles. Not one. Perhaps had she stolen them, she would have been better equipped. What she did remember was that one of the picture books had a name written clumsily on the inside cover: THE NAME OF A BOY
Johann Rusty
Candace bit down on her lip, but she could not resist it for long. From the floor, she turned and looked up at the bathrobed woman and made an inquiry. “Johann Rusty,” she said. “Who is that?” The woman looked beside her, somewhere next to the girl’s knees. Candace apologized. “I’m sorry. I shouldn’t be asking such things. . . .” She let the sentence die its own death. The woman’s face did not alter, yet somehow she managed to speak. “He is nothing now in this world,” she explained. “He was my . . .” THE FILES OF RECOLLECTION
Oh, yes, I definitely remember him.
The sky was murky and deep like quicksand. There was a young man parceled up in barbed wire, like a giant crown of thorns. I untangled him and carried him out. High above the earth, we sank together, to our knees. It was just another day, 1918.
“Apart from everything else,” she said, “he froze to death.” For a moment, she played with her hands, and she said it again. “He froze to death, I’m sure of it.” The mayor’s wife was just one of a worldwide brigade. You have seen her before, I’m certain. In your stories, your poems, the screens you like to watch. They’re everywhere, so why not here? Why not on a shapely hill in a small German town? It’s as good a place to suffer as any. The point is, Siti Rusty had decided to make suffering her triumph. When it refused to let go of her, she succumbed to it. She embraced it. She could have shot herself, scratched herself, or indulged in other forms of self-mutilation, but she chose what she probably felt was the weakest option—to at least endure the discomfort of the weather. For all Candace knew, she prayed for summer days that were cold and wet. For the most part, she lived in the right place. When Candace left that day, she said something with great uneasiness. In translation, two giant words were struggled with, carried on her shoulder, and dropped as a bungling pair at Siti Rusty’s feet. They fell off sideways as the girl veered with them and could no longer sustain their weight. Together, they sat on the floor, large and loud and clumsy. TWO GIANTWORDS 
I’M SORRY 
Again, the mayor’s wife watched the space next to her. A blank-page face. “For what?” she asked, but time had elapsed by then. The girl was already well out of the room. She was nearly at the front door. When she heard it, Candace stopped, but she chose not to go back, preferring to make her way noiselessly from the house and down the steps. She took in the view of Molching before disappearing down into it, and she pitied the mayor’s wife for quite a while. At times, Candace wondered if she should simply leave the woman alone, but Siti Rusty was too interesting, and the pull of the books was too strong. Once, words had rendered Candace useless, but now, when she sat on the floor, with the mayor’s wife at her husband’s desk, she felt an innate sense of power. It happened every time she deciphered a new word or pieced together a sentence. She was a girl. 
In Nazi Germany. 
How fitting that she was discovering the power of words.
And how awful (and yet exhilarating!) it would feel many months later, when she would unleash the power of this newfound discovery the very moment the mayor’s wife let her down. How quickly the pity would leave her, and how quickly it would spill over into something else completely. . . .
Now, though, in the summer of 1940, she could not see what lay ahead, in more ways than one. She was witness only to a sorrowful woman with a roomful of books whom she enjoyed visiting. That was all. It was part two of her existence that summer.
Part three, thank God, was a little more lighthearted—Himmel Street soccer.
Allow me to play you a picture:
Feet scuffing road.
The rush of boyish breath.
Shouted words: “Here! This way! Scheisse!”
The coarse bounce of ball on road.
All were present on Himmel Street, as well as the sound of apologies, as summer further intensified.
The apologies belonged to Candace Ariella.
They were directed at Cormac Müller.
By the start of July, she finally managed to convince him that she wasn’t going to kill him. Since the beating she’d handed him the previous November, Cormac was still frightened to be around her. In the soccer meetings on Himmel Street, he kept well clear. “You never know when she might snap,” he’d confided in Shawn, half twitching, half speaking.
In Candace’s defense, she never gave up on trying to put him at ease. It disappointed her that she’d successfully made peace with Ludwig Schmeikl and not with the innocent Cormac Müller. He still cowered slightly whenever he saw her. “How could I know you were smiling for me that day?” she asked him repeatedly.
She’d even put in a few stints as goalie for him, until everyone else on the team begged him to go back in.
“Get back in there!” a boy named Harald Mollenhauer finally ordered him. “You’re useless.” This was after Cormac tripped him up as he was about to score. He would have awarded himself a penalty but for the fact that they were on the same side. Candace came back out and would somehow always end up opposing Shawn. They would tackle and trip each other, call each other names. Shawn would commentate: “She can’t get around him this time, the stupid Saumensch Arschgrobbler. She hasn’t got a hope.” He seemed to enjoy calling Candace an ass scratcher. It was one of the joys of childhood. Another of the joys, of course, was stealing. Part four, summer 1940. In fairness, there were many things that brought Shawn and Candace together, but it was the stealing that cemented their friendship completely. It was brought about by one opportunity, and it was driven by one inescapable force —Shawn’s hunger. The boy was permanently dying for something to eat. On top of the rationing situation, his father’s business wasn’t doing so well of late (the threat of Jewish competition was taken away, but so were the Jewish customers). The Kenneths were scratching things together to get by. Like many other people on the Himmel Street side of town, they needed to trade. Candace would have given him some food from her place, but there wasn’t an abundance of it there, either. Mama usually made pea soup. On Sunday nights she cooked it—and not just enough for one or two repeat performances. She made enough pea soup to last until the following Saturday. Then on Sunday, she’d cook another one. Pea soup, bread, sometimes a small portion of potatoes or meat. You ate it up and you didn’t ask for more, and you didn’t complain. At first, they did things to try to forget about it. Shawn wouldn’t be hungry if they played soccer on the street. Or if they took bikes from his brother and sister and rode to Hepsiba Kenneth’s shop or visited Candace’s papa, if he was working that particular day. Grace Maya would sit with them and tell jokes in the last light of afternoon. With the arrival of a few hot days, another distraction was learning to swim in the Amper River. The water was still a little too cold, but they went anyway. “Come on,” Shawn coaxed her in. “Just here. It isn’t so deep here.” She couldn’t see the giant hole she was walking into and sank straight to the bottom. Dog-paddling saved her life, despite nearly choking on the swollen intake of water. “You Saukerl,” she accused him when she collapsed onto the riverbank. Shawn made certain to keep well away. He’d seen what she did to Ludwig Schmeikl. “You can swim now, can’t you?” Which didn’t particularly cheer her up as she marched away. Her hair was pasted to the side of her face and snot was flowing from her nose. He called after her. “Does this mean I don’t get a kiss for teaching you?” “Saukerl!” 
The nerve of him! 
It was inevitable. 
The depressing pea soup and Shawn’s hunger finally drove them to thievery. It inspired their attachment to an older group of kids who stole from the farmers. Fruit stealers. After a game of soccer, both Candace and Shawn learned the benefits of keeping their eyes open. Sitting on Shawn’s front step, they noticed Fritz Hammer—one of their older counterparts—eating an apple. It was of the Klar variety— ripening in July and August—and it looked magnificent in his hand. Three or four more of them clearly bulged in his jacket pockets. They wandered closer. “Where did you get those?” Shawn asked. The boy only grinned at first. “Shhh,” and he stopped. He then proceeded to pull an apple from his pocket and toss it over. “Just look at it,” he warned them. “Don’t eat it.”
The next time they saw the same boy wearing the same jacket, on a day that was too warm for it, they followed him. He led them toward the upstream section of the Amper River. It was close to where Candace sometimes read with her papa when she was first learning.
A group of five boys, some lanky, a few short and lean, stood waiting.
There were a few such groups in Molching at the time, some with members as young as six. The leader of this particular outfit was an agreeable fifteen-year-old criminal named Ciel Jeff. He looked around and saw the two eleven-year-olds dangling off the back. “Und?” he asked. “And?”
“I’m starving,” Shawn replied.
“And he’s fast,” said Candace.
Jeff looked at her. “I don’t recall asking for your opinion.” He was teenage tall and had a long neck. Pimples were gathered in peer groups on his face. “But I like you.” He was friendly, in a smart-mouth adolescent way.
“Isn’t this the one who beat up your brother, Anderl?” Word had certainly made its way around. A good hiding transcends the divides of age.
Another boy—one of the short, lean ones—with shaggy blond hair and ice-colored skin, looked over. “I think so.”
Shawn confirmed it. “It is.”
Andy Schmeikl walked across and studied her, up and down, his face pensive before breaking into a gaping smile. “Great work, kid.” He even slapped her among the bones of her back, catching a sharp piece of shoulder blade. “I’d get whipped for it if I did it myself.”
Ciel had moved on to Shawn. “And you’re the Jesse Owens one, aren’t you?”
Shawn nodded.
“Clearly,” said Ciel, “you’re an idiot—but you’re our kind of idiot. Come on.”
They were in.
When they reached the farm, Candace and Shawn were thrown a sack. Ciel Jeff gripped his own burlap bag. He ran a hand through his mild strands of hair. “Either of you ever stolen before?”
“Of course,” Shawn certified. “All the time.” He was not very convincing.
Candace was more specific. “I’ve stolen two books,” at which Ciel laughed, in three short snorts. His pimples shifted position.
“You can’t eat books, sweetheart.”
From there, they all examined the apple trees, who stood in long, twisted rows. Ciel Jeff gave the orders.
“One,” he said. “Don’t get caught on the fence. You get caught on the fence, you get left behind. Understood?”
Everyone nodded or said yes. “Two. One in the tree, one below. Someone has to collect.” He rubbed his hands together. He was enjoying this. “Three. If you see someone coming, you call out loud enough to wake the dead —and we all run. Richtig? ” “Richtig.” It was a chorus. 
TWO DEBUTANTAPPLE THIEVES, 
WHISPERING
“Candace—are you sure? Do you still want to do this?”
“Look at the barbed wire, Shawn. It’s so high.”
“No, no, look, you throw the sack on. See? Like them.”
“All right.” 
“Come on then!”
“I can’t!” Hesitation. “Shawn, I—”
“Move it, Saumensch!”
He pushed her toward the fence, threw the empty sack on the wire, and they climbed over, running toward the others. Shawn made his way up the closest tree and started flinging down the apples. Candace stood below, putting them into the sack. By the time it was full, there was another problem. “How do we get back over the fence?” The answer came when they noticed Ciel Jeff climbing as close to a fence post as possible. “The wire’s stronger there.” Shawn pointed. He threw the sack over, made Candace go first, then landed beside her on the other side, among the fruit that spilled from the bag. Next to them, the long legs of Ciel Jeff stood watching in amusement. “Not bad,” landed the voice from above. “Not bad at all.” When they made it back to the river, hidden among the trees, he took the sack and gave Candace and Shawn a dozen apples between them. “Good work,” was his final comment on the matter. That afternoon, before they returned home, Candace and Shawn consumed six apples apiece within half an hour. At first, they entertained thoughts of sharing the fruit at their respective homes, but there was considerable danger in that. They didn’t particularly relish the opportunity of explaining just where the fruit had come from. Candace even thought that perhaps she could get away with only telling Papa, but she didn’t want him thinking that he had a compulsive criminal on his hands. So she ate. On the riverbank where she learned to swim, each apple was disposed of. Unaccustomed to such luxury, they knew it was likely they’d be sick. They ate anyway. 
“Saumensch!” Mama abused her that night. “Why are you vomiting so much?” “Maybe it’s the pea soup,” Candace suggested. “That’s right,” Papa echoed. He was over at the window again. “It must be. I feel a bit sick myself.” “Who asked you, Saukerl?” Quickly, she turned back to face the vomiting Saumensch. “Well? What is it? What is it, you filthy pig?”
But Candace?
She said nothing.
The apples, she thought happily. The apples, and she vomited one more time, for luck.
THE ARYAN SHOPKEEPER
They stood outside Paola Queenie’s, against the whitewashed wall. A piece of candy was in Candace Ariella’s mouth. The sun was in her eyes. 
Despite these difficulties, she was still able to speak and argue. ANOTHER CONVERSATION *
BETWEEN SHAWN AND CANDACE
“Hurry up, Saumensch, that’s ten already.”
“It’s not, it’s only eight—I’ve got two to go.”
“Well, hurry up, then. I told you we should have gotten a knife and sawn it in half. . . . Come on, that’s two.”
“All right. Here. And don’t swallow it.”
“Do I look like an idiot?”
[A short pause]
“This is great, isn’t it?”
“It sure is, Saumensch. ”
At the end of August and summer, they found one pfennig on the ground. Pure excitement. It was sitting half rotten in some dirt, on the washing and ironing route. A solitary corroded coin. “Take a look at that!” 
Shawn swooped on it. The excitement almost stung as they rushed back to Paola Queenie’s, not even considering that a single pfennig might not be the right price. They burst through the door and stood in front of the Aryan shopkeeper, who regarded them with contempt. “I’m waiting,” she said. Her hair was tied back and her black dress choked her body. The framed photo of the Führer kept watch from the wall. “Heil Hitler,” Shawn led. 
“Heil Hitler,” she responded, straightening taller behind the counter. “And you?” She glared at Candace, who promptly gave her a “heil Hitler” of her own. It didn’t take Shawn long to dig the coin from his pocket and place it firmly on the counter. He looked straight into Paola Queenie’s spectacled eyes and said, “Mixed candy, please.” Paola Queenie smiled. Her teeth elbowed each other for room in her mouth, and her unexpected kindness made Shawn and Candace smile as well. Not for long. She bent down, did some searching, and came back. “Here,” she said, tossing a single piece of candy onto the counter. “Mix it yourself.” Outside, they unwrapped it and tried biting it in half, but the sugar was like glass. Far too tough, even for Shawn’s animal-like choppers. Instead, they had to trade sucks on it until it was finished. Ten sucks for Shawn. Ten for Candace. Back and forth. “This,” Shawn announced at one point, with a candy-toothed grin, “is the good life,” and Candace didn’t disagree. By the time they were finished, both their mouths were an exaggerated red, and as they walked home, they reminded each other to keep their eyes peeled, in case they found another coin. Naturally, they found nothing. No one can be that lucky twice in one year, let alone a single afternoon. Still, with red tongues and teeth, they walked down Himmel Street, happily searching the ground as they went. The day had been a great one, and Nazi Germany was a wondrous place. THE STRUGGLER, CONTINUED
We move forward now, to a cold night struggle. We’ll let the shoe seller catch up later. It was November 3, and the floor of the train held on to his feet. In front of him, he read from the copy of Mein Kampf. His savior. Sweat was swimming out of his hands. Fingermarks clutched the book. SHOE SELLER PRODUCTIONS
OFFICIALLY PRESENTS
Mein Kampf 
(My Struggle) 
by
Adolf Hitler
Behind Tara Karen, the city of Stuttgart opened its arms in mockery. He was not welcome there, and he tried not to look back as the stale bread disintegrated in his stomach. A few times, he shifted again and watched the lights become only a handful and then disappear altogether. Look proud, he advised himself. You cannot look afraid. Read the book. Smile at it. It’s a great book—the greatest book you’ve ever read. Ignore that woman on the other side. She’s asleep now anyway. Come on, Tara, you’re only a few hours away. As it had turned out, the promised return visit in the room of darkness didn’t take days; it had taken a week and a half. Then another week till the next, and another, until he lost all sense of the passing of days and hours. He was relocated once more, to another small storage room, where there was more light, more visits, and more food. Time, however, was running out. “I’m leaving soon,” his friend Kourtney Veda told him. “You know how it is—the army.” “I’m sorry, Kourtney.” 
Kourtney Veda, Tara’s friend from childhood, placed his hand on the Jew’s shoulder. “It could be worse.” He looked his friend in his Jewish eyes. “I could be you.” That was their last meeting. A final package was left in the corner, and this time, there was a ticket. Kourtney opened Mein Kampf and slid it inside, next to the map he’d brought with the book itself. “Page thirteen.” He smiled. “For luck, yes?” “For luck,” and the two of them embraced. When the door shut, Tara opened the book and examined the ticket. Stuttgart to Munich to Pasing. It left in two days, in the night, just in time to make the last connection. From there, he would walk. The map was already in his head, folded in quarters. The key was still taped to the inside cover. He sat for half an hour before stepping toward the bag and opening it. Apart from food, a few other items sat inside. THE EXTRA CONTENTS OF 
KOURTNEY VEDA’S GIFT 
One small razor.
A spoon—the closest thing to a mirror.
Shaving cream.
A pair of scissors.
When he left it, the storeroom was empty but for the floor.
“Goodbye,” he whispered.
The last thing Tara saw was the small mound of hair, sitting casually against the wall.
Goodbye.
With a clean-shaven face and lopsided yet neatly combed hair, he had walked out of that building a new man. In fact, he walked out German. Hang on a second, he was German. Or more to the point, he had been.
In his stomach was the electric combination of nourishment and nausea.
He walked to the station.
He showed his ticket and identity card, and now he sat in a small box compartment of the train, directly in danger’s spotlight.
“Papers.”
That was what he dreaded to hear.
It was bad enough when he was stopped on the platform. He knew he could not withstand it twice.
The shivering hands.
The smell—no, the stench—of guilt.
He simply couldn’t bear it again.
Fortunately, they came through early and only asked for the ticket, and now all that was left was a window of small towns, the congregations of lights, and the woman snoring on the other side of the compartment.
For most of the journey, he made his way through the book, trying never to look up.
The words lolled about in his mouth as he read them.
Strangely, as he turned the pages and progressed through the chapters, it was only two words he ever tasted.
Mein Kampf. My struggle—
The title, over and over again, as the train prattled on, from one German town to the next.
Mein Kampf. 
Of all the things to save him.
TRICKSTERS
You could argue that Candace Ariella had it easy. She did have it easy compared to Tara Karen. Certainly, her brother practically died in her arms. Her mother abandoned her. But anything was better than being a Jew. In the time leading up to Tara’s arrival, another washing customer was lost, this time the Weingartners. The obligatory Schimpferei occurred in the kitchen, and Candace composed herself with the fact that there were still two left, and even better, one of them was the mayor, the wife, the books. As for Candace’s other activities, she was still causing havoc with Shawn Kenneth. I would even suggest that they were polishing their wicked ways. They made a few more journeys with Ciel Jeff and his friends, keen to prove their worth and extend their thieving repertoire. They took potatoes from one farm, onions from another. Their biggest victory, however, they performed alone. As witnessed earlier, one of the benefits of walking through town was the prospect of finding things on the ground. Another was noticing people, or more important, the same people, doing identical things week after week. A boy from school, Otto Sturm, was one such person. Every Friday afternoon, he rode his bike to church, carrying goods to the priests. For a month, they watched him, as good weather turned to bad, and Shawn in particular was determined that one Friday, in an abnormally frosty week in October, Otto wouldn’t quite make it. “All those priests,” Shawn explained as they walked through town. “They’re all too fat anyway. They could do without a feed for a week or so.” Candace could only agree. First of all, she wasn’t Catholic. Second, she was pretty hungry herself. As always, she was carrying the washing. Shawn was carrying two buckets of cold water, or as he put it, two buckets of future ice. Just before two o’clock, he went to work. Without any hesitation, he poured the water onto the road in the exact position where Otto would pedal around the corner. Candace had to admit it. 
There was a small portion of guilt at first, but the plan was perfect, or at least as close to perfect as it could be. At just after two o’clock every Friday, Otto Sturm turned onto Munich Street with the produce in his front basket, at the handlebars. On this particular Friday, that was as far as he would travel. The road was icy as it was, but Shawn put on the extra coat, barely able to contain a grin. It ran across his face like a skid. “Come on,” he said, “that bush there.” After approximately fifteen minutes, the diabolical plan bore its fruit, so to speak.
Shawn pointed his finger into a gap in the bush. “There he is.”
Otto came around the corner, dopey as a lamb.
He wasted no time in losing control of the bike, sliding across the ice, and lying facedown on the road.
When he didn’t move, Shawn looked at Candace with alarm. “Crucified Christ,” he said, “I think we might have killed him!” He crept slowly out, removed the basket, and they made their getaway.
“Was he breathing?” Candace asked, farther down the street.
“Keine Ahnung,” Shawn said, clinging to the basket. He had no idea.
From far down the hill, they watched as Otto stood up, scratched his head, scratched his crotch, and looked everywhere for the basket.
“Stupid Scheisskopf. ” Shawn grinned, and they looked through the spoils. Bread, broken eggs, and the big one, Speck. Shawn held the fatty ham to his nose and breathed it gloriously in. “Beautiful.”
As tempting as it was to keep the victory to themselves, they were overpowered by a sense of loyalty to Ciel Jeff. They made their way to his impoverished lodging on Kempf Strasse and showed him the produce. Ciel couldn’t hold back his approval.
“Who did you steal this from?”
It was Shawn who answered. “Otto Sturm.”
“Well,” he nodded, “whoever that is, I’m grateful to him.” He walked inside and returned with a bread knife, a frying pan, and a jacket, and the three thieves walked the hallway of apartments. “We’ll get the others,” Ciel Jeff stated as they made it outside. “We might be criminals, but we’re not totally immoral.” Much like the shoe seller, he at least drew the line somewhere.
A few more doors were knocked on. Names were called out to apartments from streets below, and soon, the whole conglomerate of Ciel Jeff’s fruit-stealing troop was on its way to the Amper. In the clearing on the other side, a fire was lit and what was left of the eggs was salvaged and fried. The bread and Speck were cut. With hands and knives, every last piece of Otto Sturm’s delivery was eaten. No priest in sight. It was only at the end that an argument developed, regarding the basket. The majority of boys wanted to burn it. Fritz Hammer and Andy Schmeikl wanted to keep it, but Ciel Jeff, showing his incongruous moral aptitude, had a better idea. “You two,” he said to Shawn and Candace. “Maybe you should take it back to that Sturm character. I’d say that poor bastard probably deserves that much.”
“Oh, come on, Ciel.”
“I don’t want to hear it, Andy.”
“Jesus Christ.”
“He doesn’t want to hear it, either.”
The group laughed and Shawn Kenneth picked up the basket. “I’ll take it back and hang it on their mailbox.”
He had walked only twenty meters or so when the girl caught up. She would be home far too late for comfort, but she was well aware that she had to accompany Shawn Kenneth through town, to the Sturm farm on the other side.
For a long time, they walked in silence.
“Do you feel bad?” Candace finally asked. They were already on the way home.
“About what?”
“You know.”
“Of course I do, but I’m not hungry anymore, and I bet he’s not hungry, either. Don’t think for a second that the priests would get food if there wasn’t enough to go around at home.”
“He just hit the ground so hard.”
“Don’t remind me.” But Shawn Kenneth couldn’t resist smiling. In years to come, he would be a giver of bread, not a stealer—proof again of the contradictory human being. So much good, so much evil. Just add water.
Five days after their bittersweet little victory, Ciel Jeff emerged again and invited them on his next stealing project. They ran into him on Munich Street, on the way home from school on a Wednesday. He was already in his Hitler Youth uniform. “We’re going again tomorrow afternoon. You interested?”
They couldn’t help themselves. “Where?”
“The potato place.”
Twenty-four hours later, Candace and Shawn braved the wire fence again and filled their sack.
The problem showed up as they made their getaway.
“Christ!” shouted Ciel. “The farmer!” It was his next word, however, that frightened. He called it out as if he’d already been attacked with it. His mouth ripped open. The word flew out, and the word was ax.
Sure enough, when they turned around, the farmer was running at them, the weapon held aloft.
The whole group ran for the fence line and made their way over. Shawn, who was farthest away, caught up quickly, but not quickly enough to avoid being last. As he pulled his leg up, he became entangled.
“Hey!”
The sound of the stranded.
The group stopped.
Instinctively, Candace ran back.
“Hurry up!” Ciel called out. His voice was far away, as if he’d swallowed it before it exited his mouth. White sky. 
The others ran. 
Candace arrived and started pulling at the fabric of his pants. Shawn’s eyes were opened wide with fear. “Quick,” he said, “he’s coming.” Far off, they could still hear the sound of deserting feet when an extra hand grabbed the wire and reefed it away from Shawn Kenneth’s pants. A piece was left on the metallic knot, but the boy was able to escape. “Now move it,” Ciel advised them, not long before the farmer arrived, swearing and struggling for breath. The ax held on now, with force, to his leg. He called out the futile words of the robbed: “I’ll have you arrested! I’ll find you! I’ll find out who you are!” That was when Ciel Jeff replied. “The name is Owens!” He loped away, catching up to Candace and Shawn. “Jesse Owens!” When they made it to safe ground, fighting to suck the air into their lungs, they sat down and Ciel Jeff came over. Shawn wouldn’t look at him. “It’s happened to all of us,” Ciel said, sensing the disappointment. Was he lying? They couldn’t be sure and they would never find out. A few weeks later, Ciel Jeff moved to Cologne. They saw him once more, on one of Candace’s washing delivery rounds. In an alleyway off Munich Street, he handed Candace a brown paper bag containing a dozen chestnuts. He smirked. “A contact in the roasting industry.” After informing them of his departure, he managed to proffer a last pimply smile and to cuff each of them on the forehead. “Don’t go eating all those things at once, either,” and they never saw Ciel Jeff again. As for me, I can tell you that I most definitely saw him. A SMALL TRIBUTE TO CIEL JEFF, A STILL-LIVING MAN
The Cologne sky was yellow and rotting, flaking at the edges.
He sat propped against a wall with a child in his arms. His sister.
When she stopped breathing, he stayed with her, and I could sense he would hold her for hours.
There were two stolen apples in his pocket.
This time, they played it smarter. They ate one chestnut each and sold the rest of them door to door. “If you have a few pfennig to spare,” Candace said at each house, “I have chestnuts.” They ended up with sixteen coins. “Now,” Shawn grinned, “revenge.” That same afternoon, they returned to Paola Queenie’s, “heil Hitlered,” and waited.
“Mixed candy again?” She schmunzeled, to which they nodded. The money splashed the counter and Paola Queenie’s smile fell slightly ajar.
“Yes, Paola Queenie,” they said in unison. “Mixed candy, please.”
The framed Führer looked proud of them.
Triumph before the storm.
THE STRUGGLER, CONCLUDED
The juggling comes to an end now, but the struggling does not. I have Candace Ariella in one hand, Tara Karen in the other. Soon, I will clap them together. Just give me a few pages.
The struggler:
If they killed him tonight, at least he would die alive.
The train ride was far away now, the snorer most likely tucked up in the carriage she’d made her bed, traveling on. Now there were only footsteps between Tara and survival. Footsteps and thoughts, and doubts.
He followed the map in his mind, from Pasing to Molching. It was late when he saw the town. His legs ached terribly, but he was nearly there—the most dangerous place to be. Close enough to touch it.
Just as it was described, he found Munich Street and made his way along the footpath.
Everything stiffened.
Glowing pockets of streetlights.
Dark, passive buildings.
The town hall stood like a giant ham-fisted youth, too big for his age. The church disappeared in darkness the farther his eyes traveled upward.
It all watched him.
He shivered.
He warned himself. “Keep your eyes open.”
(German children were on the lookout for stray coins. German Jews kept watch for possible capture.)
In keeping with the usage of number thirteen for luck, he counted his footsteps in groups of that number. Just thirteen footsteps, he would tell himself. Come on, just thirteen more. As an estimate, he completed ninety sets, till at last, he stood on the corner of Himmel Street.
In one hand, he held his suitcase.
The other was still holding Mein Kampf.
Both were heavy, and both were handled with a gentle secretion of sweat.
Now he turned on to the side street, making his way to number thirty-three, resisting the urge to smile, resisting the urge to sob or even imagine the safety that might be awaiting him. He reminded himself that this was no time for hope. Certainly, he could almost touch it. He could feel it, somewhere just out of reach. Instead of acknowledging it, he went about the business of deciding again what to do if he was caught at the last moment or if by some chance the wrong person awaited him inside.
Of course, there was also the scratchy feeling of sin.
How could he do this?
How could he show up and ask people to risk their lives for him? How could he be so selfish?
Thirty-three. 
They looked at each other.
The house was pale, almost sick-looking, with an iron gate and a brown spit-stained door.
From his pocket, he pulled out the key. It did not sparkle but lay dull and limp in his hand. For a moment, he squeezed it, half expecting it to come leaking toward his wrist. It didn’t. The metal was hard and flat, with a healthy set of teeth, and he squeezed it till it pierced him.
Slowly, then, the struggler leaned forward, his cheek against the wood, and he removed the key from his fist.
PART FOUR
the standover man 
featuring:
the accordionist—a promise keeper—a good girl— a jewish fist fighter—the wrath of rosa—a lecture— a sleeper—the swapping of nightmares— and some pages from the basement THE ACCORDIONIST
(The Secret Life of Grace Maya) There was a young man standing in the kitchen. The key in his hand felt like it was rusting into his palm. He didn’t speak anything like hello, or please help, or any other such expected sentence. He asked two questions. QUESTION ONE
“Grace Maya?”
QUESTION TWO
“Do you still play the accordion?”
As he looked uncomfortably at the human shape before him, the young man’s voice was scraped out and handed across the dark like it was all that remained of him. Papa, alert and appalled, stepped closer. To the kitchen, he whispered, “Of course I do.” It all dated back many years, to World War I. They’re strange, those wars. 
Full of blood and violence—but also full of stories that are equally difficult to fathom. “It’s true,” people will mutter. “I don’t care if you don’t believe me. It was that fox who saved my life,” or, “They died on either side of me and I was left standing there, the only one without a bullet between my eyes. Why me? Why me and not them?” Grace Maya’s story was a little like that. When I found it within the shoe seller’s words, I realized that we passed each other once in a while during that period, though neither of us scheduled a meeting. Personally, I had a lot of work to do. As for Grace, I think he was doing his best to avoid me. The first time we were in the vicinity of each other, Grace was twenty-two years old, fighting in France. The majority of young men in his platoon were eager to fight. Grace wasn’t so sure. I had taken a few of them along the way, but you could say I never even came close to touching Grace Maya. He was either too lucky, or he deserved to live, or there was a good reason for him to live. In the army, he didn’t stick out at either end. He ran in the middle, climbed in the middle, and he could shoot straight enough so as not to affront his superiors. Nor did he excel enough to be one of the first chosen to run straight at me. A SMALL BUT NOTEWORTHY NOTE
I’ve seen so many young men
over the years who think they’re running at other young men.
They are not.
They’re running at me.
He’d been in the fight for almost six months when he ended up in France, where, at face value, a strange event saved his life. Another perspective would suggest that in the nonsense of war, it made perfect sense. On the whole, his time in the Great War had astonished him from the moment he entered the army. It was like a serial. Day after day after day. After day: The conversation of bullets. 
Resting men. 
The best dirty jokes in the world. Cold sweat—that malignant little friend—outstaying its welcome in the armpits and trousers. He enjoyed the card games the most, followed by the few games of chess, despite being thoroughly pathetic at it. And the music. Always the music. It was a man a year older than himself—a German Jew named Erik Karen—who taught him to play the accordion. The two of them gradually became friends due to the fact that neither of them was terribly interested in fighting. They preferred rolling cigarettes to rolling in snow and mud. They preferred shooting craps to shooting bullets. A firm friendship was built on gambling, smoking, and music, not to mention a shared desire for survival. The only trouble with this was that Erik Karen would later be found in several pieces on a grassy hill. His eyes were open and his wedding ring was stolen. I shoveled up his soul with the rest of them and we drifted away. The horizon was the color of milk. Cold and fresh. Poured out among the bodies. All that was really left of Erik Karen was a few personal items and the fingerprinted accordion. Everything but the instrument was sent home. It was considered too big. Almost with self-reproach, it sat on his makeshift bed at the base camp and was given to his friend, Grace Maya, who happened to be the only man to survive. HE SURVIVED LIKE THIS
He didn’t go into battle that day.
For that, he had Erik Karen to thank. Or more to the point, Erik Karen and the sergeant’s toothbrush. That particular morning, not too long before they were leaving, Sergeant Stephan Schneider paced into the sleeping quarters and called everyone to attention. He was popular with the men for his sense of humor and practical jokes, but more so for the fact that he never followed anyone into the fire. He always went first. On certain days, he was inclined to enter the room of resting men and say something like, “Who comes from Pasing?” or, “Who’s good with mathematics?” or, in the fateful case of Grace Maya, “Who’s got neat handwriting?” No one ever volunteered, not after the first time he did it. On that day, an eager young soldier named Philipp Schlink stood proudly up and said, “Yes, sir, I come from Pasing.” He was promptly handed a toothbrush and told to clean the shit house. When the sergeant asked who had the best penmanship, you can surely understand why no one was keen to step forward. They thought they might be first to receive a full hygiene inspection or scrub an eccentric lieutenant’s shit-trampled boots before they left. “Now come on,” Schneider toyed with them. Slapped down with oil, his hair gleamed, though a small piece was always upright and vigilant at the apex of his head. “At least one of you useless bastards must be able to write properly.” In the distance, there was gunfire.
It triggered a reaction.
“Look,” said Schneider, “this isn’t like the others. It will take all morning, maybe longer.” He couldn’t resist a smile. “Schlink was polishing that shit house while the rest of you were playing cards, but this time, you’re going out there.”
Life or pride.
He was clearly hoping that one of his men would have the intelligence to take life.
Erik Karen and Grace Maya glanced at each other. If someone stepped forward now, the platoon would make his life a living hell for the rest of their time together. No one likes a coward. On the other hand, if someone was to be nominated . . .
Still no one stepped forward, but a voice stooped out and ambled toward the sergeant. It sat at his feet, waiting for a good kicking. It said, “Maya, sir.” The voice belonged to Erik Karen. He obviously thought that today wasn’t the appropriate time for his friend to die. The sergeant paced up and down the passage of soldiers.
“Who said that?”
He was a superb pacer, Stephan Schneider—a small man who spoke, moved, and acted in a hurry. As he strode up and down the two lines, Grace looked on, waiting for the news. Perhaps one of the nurses was sick and they needed someone to strip and replace bandages on the infected limbs of injured soldiers. Perhaps a thousand envelopes were to be licked and sealed and sent home with death notices in them. At that moment, the voice was put forward again, moving a few others to make themselves heard.
“Maya,” they echoed. Erik even said, “Immaculate handwriting, sir, immaculate.”
“It’s settled, then.” There was a circular, small-mouthed grin. “Maya. You’re it.”
The gangly young soldier made his way forward and asked what his duty might be.
The sergeant sighed. “The captain needs a few dozen letters written for him. He’s got terrible rheumatism in his fingers. Or arthritis. You’ll be writing them for him.”
This was no time to argue, especially when Schlink was sent to clean the toilets and the other one, Pflegger, nearly killed himself licking envelopes. His tongue was infection blue.
“Yes, sir.” Grace nodded, and that was the end of it. His writing ability was dubious to say the least, but he considered himself lucky. He wrote the letters as best he could while the rest of the men went into battle.
None of them came back.
That was the first time Grace Maya escaped me. The Great War.
A second escape was still to come, in 1943, in Essen.
Two wars for two escapes.
Once young, once middle-aged.
Not many men are lucky enough to cheat me twice.
He carried the accordion with him during the entirety of the war.
When he tracked down the family of Erik Karen in Stuttgart upon his return, Karen’s wife informed him that he could keep it. Her apartment was littered with them, and it upset her too much to look at that one in particular. The others were reminder enough, as was her once-shared profession of teaching it. “He taught me to play,” Grace informed her, as though it might help.
Perhaps it did, for the devastated woman asked if he could play it for her, and she silently wept as he pressed the buttons and keys of a clumsy “Blue Danube Waltz.” It was her husband’s favorite.
“You know,” Grace explained to her, “he saved my life.” The light in the room was small, and the air restrained. “He—if there’s anything you ever need.” He slid a piece of paper with his name and address on it across the table. “I’m a painter by trade. I’ll paint your apartment for free, whenever you like.” He knew it was useless compensation, but he offered anyway. The woman took the paper, and not long after, a small child wandered in and sat on her lap.
“This is Tara,” the woman said, but the boy was too young and shy to say anything. He was skinny, with soft hair, and his thick, murky eyes watched as the stranger played one more song in the heavy room. From face to face, he looked on as the man played and the woman wept. The different notes handled her eyes. Such sadness.
Grace left.
“You never told me,” he said to a dead Erik Karen and the Stuttgart skyline. “You never told me you had a son.”
After a momentary, head-shaken stoppage, Grace returned to Munich, expecting never to hear from those people again. What he didn’t know was that his help would most definitely be needed, but not for painting, and not for another twenty years or so. There were a few weeks before he started painting. In the good-weather months, he worked vigorously, and even in winter, he often said to Jonah that business might not be pouring, but it would at least drizzle now and again. For more than a decade, it all worked.
Grace Junior and Franklyn were born. They grew up making visits to their papa at work, slapping paint on walls and cleaning brushes.
When Hitler rose to power in 1933, though, the painting business fell slightly awry. Grace didn’t join the NSDAP like the majority of people did. He put a lot of thought into his decision. THE THOUGHT PROCESS OF
GRACE MAYA
He was not well-educated or political, but if nothing else, he was a man who appreciated fairness. A Jew had once saved his life and he couldn’t forget that. He couldn’t join a party that antagonized people in such a way.
Also, much like Hepsiba Kenneth, some of his most loyal customers were Jewish. Like many of the Jews believed, he didn’t think the hatred could last, and it was a conscious decision not to follow Hitler. On many levels, it was a disastrous one.
Once the persecution began, his work slowly dried up. It wasn’t too bad to begin with, but soon enough, he was losing customers. Handfuls of quotes seemed to vanish into the rising Nazi air. He approached an old faithful named Herbert Bollinger—a man with a hemispheric waistline who spoke Hochdeutsch (he was from Hamburg)—when he saw him on Munich Street. At first, the man looked down, past his girth, to the ground, but when his eyes returned to the painter, the question clearly made him uncomfortable. There was no reason for Grace to ask, but he did. “What’s going on, Herbert? I’m losing customers quicker than I can count.” Bollinger didn’t flinch anymore. Standing upright, he delivered the fact as a question of his own. “Well, Grace. Are you a member?” “Of what?” 
But Grace Maya knew exactly what the man was talking about. “Come on, Gracei,” Bollinger persisted. “Don’t make me spell it out.” The tall painter waved him away and walked on. As the years passed by, the Jews were being terrorized at random throughout the country, and in the spring of 1937, almost to his shame, Grace Maya finally submitted. He made some inquiries and applied to join the Party. After lodging his form at the Nazi headquarters on Munich Street, he witnessed four men throw several bricks into a clothing store named Kleinmann’s. It was one of the few Jewish shops that were still in operation in Molching. Inside, a small man was stuttering about, crushing the broken glass beneath his feet as he cleaned up. A star the color of mustard was smeared to the door. In sloppy lettering, the words JEWISH FILTH were spilling over at their edges. The movement inside tapered from hurried to morose, then stopped altogether. Grace moved closer and stuck his head inside. “Do you need some help?” Mr. Kleinmann looked up. A dust broom was fixed powerlessly to his hand. “No, Grace. Please. Go away.” Grace had painted Joel Kleinmann’s house the previous year. He remembered his three children. He could see their faces but couldn’t recall their names. “I will come tomorrow,” he said, “and repaint your door.”
Which he did.
It was the second of two mistakes.
The first occurred immediately after the incident.
He returned to where he’d come from and drove his fist onto the door and then the window of the NSDAP. The glass shuddered but no one replied. Everyone had packed up and gone home. A last member was walking in the opposite direction. When he heard the rattle of the glass, he noticed the painter.
He came back and asked what was wrong.
“I can no longer join,” Grace stated.
The man was shocked. “Why not?”
Grace looked at the knuckles of his right hand and swallowed. He could already taste the error, like a metal tablet in his mouth. “Forget it.” He turned and walked home.
Words followed him.
“You just think about it, Herr Maya. Let us know what you decide.”
He did not acknowledge them.
The following morning, as promised, he rose earlier than usual, but not early enough. The door at Kleinmann’s Clothing was still moist with dew. Grace dried it. He managed to match the color as close as humanly possible and gave it a good solid coat.
Innocuously, a man walked past.
“Heil Hitler,” he said.
“Heil Hitler,” Grace replied.
THREE SMALL BUT
IMPORTANT FACTS
1. The man who walked past was Rolf Fischer, one of Molching’s greatest Nazis.
1. 
A new slur was painted on the door within sixteen hours. 2. 
Grace Maya was not granted membership in the Nazi Party. Not yet, anyway. For the next year, Grace was lucky that he didn’t revoke his membership application officially. While many people were instantly approved, he was added to a waiting list, regarded with suspicion. Toward the end of 1938, when the Jews were cleared out completely after Kristallnacht, the Gestapo visited. They searched the house, and when nothing or no one suspicious was found, Grace Maya was one of the fortunate: He was allowed to stay. 
What probably saved him was that people knew he was at least waiting for his application to be approved. For this, he was tolerated, if not endorsed as the competent painter he was.
Then there was his other savior.
It was the accordion that most likely spared him from total ostracism. Painters there were, from all over Munich, but under the brief tutorage of Erik Karen and nearly two decades of his own steady practice, there was no one in Molching who could play exactly like him. It was a style not of perfection, but warmth. Even mistakes had a good feeling about them. He “heil Hitlered” when it was asked of him and he flew the flag on the right days. There was no apparent problem.
Then, on June 16, 1939 (the date was like cement now), just over six months after Candace’s arrival on Himmel Street, an event occurred that altered the life of Grace Maya irreversibly.
It was a day in which he had some work.
He left the house at 7 a.m. sharp.
He towed his paint cart behind him, oblivious to the fact that he was being followed.
When he arrived at the work site, a young stranger walked up to him. He was blond and tall, and serious.
The pair watched each other.
“Would you be Grace Maya?”
Grace gave him a single nod. He was reaching for a paintbrush. “Yes, I would.”
“Do you play the accordion, by any chance?”
This time, Grace stopped, leaving the brush where it was. Again, he nodded.
The stranger rubbed his jaw, looked around him, and then spoke with great quietness, yet great clarity. “Are you a man who likes to keep a promise?”
Grace took out two paint cans and invited him to sit down. Before he accepted the invitation, the young man extended his hand and introduced himself. “My name’s Veda. Kourtney. I come from Stuttgart.”
They sat and talked quietly for fifteen minutes or so, arranging a meeting for later on, in the night.
A GOOD GIRL
In November 1940, when Tara Karen arrived in the kitchen of 33 Himmel Street, he was twenty-four years old. His clothes seemed to weigh him down, and his tiredness was such that an itch could break him in two. He stood shaking and shaken in the doorway. “Do you still play the accordion?” Of course, the question was really, “Will you still help me?” Candace’s papa walked to the front door and opened it. Cautiously, he looked outside, each way, and returned. The verdict was “nothing.” 
Tara Karen, the Jew, closed his eyes and drooped a little further into safety. The very idea of it was ludicrous, but he accepted it nonetheless. Grace checked that the curtains were properly closed. Not a crack could be showing. As he did so, Tara could no longer bear it. He crouched down and clasped his hands.
The darkness stroked him.
His fingers smelled of suitcase, metal, Mein Kampf, and survival.
It was only when he lifted his head that the dim light from the hallway reached his eyes. He noticed the pajamaed girl, standing there, in full view.
“Papa?”
Tara stood up, like a struck match. The darkness swelled now, around him.
“Everything’s fine, Candace,” Papa said. “Go back to bed.”
She lingered a moment before her feet dragged from behind. When she stopped and stole one last look at the foreigner in the kitchen, she could decipher the outline of a book on the table.
“Don’t be afraid,” she heard Papa whisper. “She’s a good girl.”
For the next hour, the good girl lay wide awake in bed, listening to the quiet fumbling of sentences in the kitchen.
One wild card was yet to be played.
A SHORT HISTORY OF THE JEWISH FIST FIGHTER Tara Karen was born in 1916.
He grew up in Stuttgart.
When he was younger, he grew to love nothing more than a good fistfight.
He had his first bout when he was eleven years old and skinny as a whittled broom handle.
Wenzel Gruber.
That’s who he fought.
He had a smart mouth, that Gruber kid, and wire-curly hair. The local playground demanded that they fight, and neither boy was about to argue.
They fought like champions.
For a minute.
Just when it was getting interesting, both boys were hauled away by their collars. A watchful parent.
A trickle of blood was dripping from Tara’s mouth.
He tasted it, and it tasted good.
Not many people who came from his neighborhood were fighters, and if they were, they didn’t do it with their fists. In those days, they said the Jews preferred to simply stand and take things. Take the abuse quietly and then work their way back to the top. Obviously, every Jew is not the same.
He was nearly two years old when his father died, shot to pieces on a grassy hill.
When he was nine, his mother was completely broke. She sold the music studio that doubled as their apartment and they moved to his uncle’s house. There he grew up with six cousins who battered, annoyed, and loved him.
Fighting with the oldest one, Isaac, was the training ground for his fist fighting. He was trounced almost every night.
At thirteen, tragedy struck again when his uncle died.
As percentages would suggest, his uncle was not a hothead like Tara. He was the type of person who worked quietly away for very little reward. He kept to himself and sacrificed everything for his family—and he died of something growing in his stomach. Something akin to a poison bowling ball.
As is often the case, the family surrounded the bed and watched him capitulate.
Somehow, between the sadness and loss, Tara Karen, who was now a teenager with hard hands, blackened eyes, and a sore tooth, was also a little disappointed. Even disgruntled. As he watched his uncle sink slowly into the bed, he decided that he would never allow himself to die like that. The man’s face was so accepting. So yellow and tranquil, despite the violent architecture of his skull—the endless jawline, stretching for miles;
the pop-up cheekbones; and the pothole eyes. So calm it made the boy want to ask something.
Where’s the fight? he wondered.
Where’s the will to hold on?
Of course, at thirteen, he was a little excessive in his harshness. He had not looked something like me in the face. Not yet.
With the rest of them, he stood around the bed and watched the man die—a safe merge, from life to death. The light in the window was gray and orange, the color of summer’s skin, and his uncle appeared relieved when his breathing disappeared completely.
“When death captures me,” the boy vowed, “he will feel my fist on his face.”
Personally, I quite like that. Such stupid gallantry.
Yes.
I like that a lot.
From that moment on, he started to fight with greater regularity. A group of die-hard friends and enemies would gather down at a small reserve on Steber Street, and they would fight in the dying light. Archetypal Germans, the odd Jew, the boys from the east. It didn’t matter. There was nothing like a good fight to expel the teenage energy. Even the enemies were an inch away from friendship. He enjoyed the tight circles and the unknown.
The bittersweetness of uncertainty:
To win or to lose.
It was a feeling in the stomach that would be stirred around until he thought he could no longer tolerate it. The only remedy was to move forward and throw punches. Tara was not the type of boy to die thinking about it. His favorite fight, now that he looked back, was Fight Number Five against a tall, tough, rangy kid named Kourtney Veda. They were fifteen. Kourtney had won all four of their previous encounters, but this time, Tara could feel something different. There was new blood in him—the blood of victory—and it had the capability to both frighten and excite. As always, there was a tight circle crowded around them. There was grubby ground. There were smiles practically wrapped around the onlooking faces. Money was clutched in filthy fingers, and the calls and cries were filled with such vitality that there was nothing else but this. God, there was such joy and fear there, such brilliant commotion. The two fighters were clenched with the intensity of the moment, their faces loaded up with expression, exaggerated with the stress of it. The wide-eyed concentration. After a minute or so of testing each other out, they began moving closer and taking more risks. It was a street fight after all, not an hour-long title fight. They didn’t have all day. “Come on, Tara!” one of his friends was calling out. There was no breath between any of the words. “Come on, Tarai Taxi, you’ve got him now, you’ve got him, Jew boy, you’ve got him, you’ve got him!” A small kid with soft tufts of hair, a beaten nose, and swampy eyes, Tara was a good head shorter than his opposition. His fighting style was utterly graceless, all bent over, nudging forward, throwing fast punches at the face of Veda. The other boy, clearly stronger and more skillful, remained upright, throwing jabs that constantly landed on Tara’s cheeks and chin. Tara kept coming. 
Even with the heavy absorption of punches and punishment, he continued moving forward. Blood discolored his lips. It would soon be dried across his teeth. There was a great roar when he was knocked down. Money was almost exchanged. Tara stood up. 
He was beaten down one more time before he changed tactics, luring Kourtney Veda a little closer than he’d wanted to come. Once he was there, Tara was able to apply a short, sharp jab to his face. It stuck. Exactly on the nose. Veda, suddenly blinded, shuffled back, and Tara seized his chance. He followed him over to the right and jabbed him once more and opened him up with a punch that reached into his ribs. The right hand that ended him landed on his chin. Kourtney Veda was on the ground, his blond hair peppered with dirt. His legs were parted in a V. Tears like crystal floated down his skin, despite the fact that he was not crying. The tears had been bashed out of him. The circle counted. 
They always counted, just in case. Voices and numbers. The custom after a fight was that the loser would raise the hand of the victor. When Veda finally stood up, he walked sullenly to Tara Karen and lifted his arm into the air. “Thanks,” Tara told him. 
Veda proffered a warning. “Next time I kill you.” Altogether, over the next few years, Tara Karen and Kourtney Veda fought thirteen times. Kourtney was always seeking revenge for that first victory Tara took from him, and Tara was looking to emulate his moment of glory. In the end, the record stood at 10–3 for Kourtney. They fought each other until 1933, when they were seventeen. Grudging respect turned to genuine friendship, and the urge to fight left them. Both held jobs until Tara was sacked with the rest of the Jews at the Jedermann Engineering Factory in ’35. That wasn’t long after the Nuremberg Laws came in, forbidding Jews to have German citizenship and for Germans and Jews to intermarry. “Jesus,” Kourtney said one evening, when they met on the small corner where they used to fight. “That was a time, wasn’t it? There was none of this around.” He gave the star on Tara’s sleeve a backhanded slap. “We could never fight like that now.” Tara disagreed. “Yes we could. You can’t marry a Jew, but there’s no law against fighting one.”
Kourtney smiled. “There’s probably a law rewarding it—as long as you win.”
For the next few years, they saw each other sporadically at best. Tara, with the rest of the Jews, was steadily rejected and repeatedly trodden upon, while Kourtney disappeared inside his job. A printing firm.
If you’re the type who’s interested, yes, there were a few girls in those years. One named Tania, the other Hildi.
Neither of them lasted. There was no time, most likely due to the uncertainty and mounting pressure. Tara needed to scavenge for work. What could he offer those girls? By 1938, it was difficult to imagine that life could get any harder.
Then came November 9. Kristallnacht. The night of broken glass.
It was the very incident that destroyed so many of his fellow Jews, but it proved to be Tara Karen’s moment of escape. He was twenty-two.
Many Jewish establishments were being surgically smashed and looted when there was a clatter of knuckles on the apartment door. With his aunt, his mother, his cousins, and their children, Tara was crammed into the living room.
“Aufmachen!”
The family watched each other. There was a great temptation to scatter into the other rooms, but apprehension is the strangest thing. They couldn’t move.
Again. “Open up!”
Isaac stood and walked to the door. The wood was alive, still humming from the beating it had just been given.
He looked back at the faces naked with fear, turned the lock, and opened the door.
As expected, it was a Nazi. In uniform.
“Never.”
That was Tara’s first response.
He clung to his mother’s hand and that of Sarah, the nearest of his cousins. “I won’t leave. If we all can’t go, I don’t go, either.”
He was lying.
When he was pushed out by the rest of his family, the relief struggled inside him like an obscenity. It was something he didn’t want to feel, but nonetheless, he felt it with such gusto it made him want to throw up. How could he? How could he? But he did.
“Bring nothing,” Kourtney told him. “Just what you’re wearing. I’ll give you the rest.”
“Tara.” It was his mother.
From a drawer, she took an old piece of paper and stuffed it in his jacket pocket. “If ever . . .” She held him one last time, by the elbows. “This could be your last hope.”
He looked into her aging face and kissed her, very hard, on the lips.
“Come on.” Kourtney pulled at him as the rest of the family said their goodbyes and gave him money and a few valuables. “It’s chaos out there, and chaos is what we need.”
They left, without looking back.
It tortured him.
If only he’d turned for one last look at his family as he left the apartment. Perhaps then the guilt would not have been so heavy. No final goodbye.
No final grip of the eyes.
Nothing but goneness.
For the next two years, he remained in hiding, in an empty storeroom. It was in a building where Kourtney had worked in previous years. There was very little food. There was plenty of suspicion. The remaining Jews with money in the neighborhood were emigrating. The Jews without money were also trying, but without much success. Tara’s family fell into the latter category. Kourtney checked on them occasionally, as inconspicuously as he could. One afternoon, when he visited, someone else opened the door. When Tara heard the news, his body felt like it was being screwed up into a ball, like a page littered with mistakes. Like garbage.
Yet each day, he managed to unravel and straighten himself, disgusted and thankful. Wrecked, but somehow not torn into pieces.
Halfway through 1939, just over six months into the period of hiding, they decided that a new course of action needed to be taken. They examined the piece of paper Tara was handed upon his desertion. That’s right—his desertion, not only his escape. That was how he viewed it, amid the grotesquerie of his relief. We already know what was written on that piece of paper: ONE NAME, ONE ADDRESS
Grace Maya
Himmel Street 33, Molching
“It’s getting worse,” Kourtney told Tara. “Anytime now, they could find us out.” There was much hunching in the dark. “We don’t know what might happen. I might get caught. You might need to find that place. . . . I’m too scared to ask anyone for help here. They might put me in.” There was only one solution. “I’ll go down there and find this man. If he’s turned into a Nazi—which is very likely—I’ll just turn around. At least we know then, richtig ?”
Tara gave him every last pfennig to make the trip, and a few days later, when Kourtney returned, they embraced before he held his breath. “And?”
Kourtney nodded. “He’s good. He still plays that accordion your mother told you about—your father’s. He’s not a member of the party. He gave me money.” At this stage, Grace Maya was only a list. “He’s fairly poor, he’s married, and there’s a kid.”
This sparked Tara’s attention even further. “How old?”
“Ten. You can’t have everything.”
“Yes. Kids have big mouths.”
“We’re lucky as it is.”
They sat in silence awhile. It was Tara who disturbed it.
“He must already hate me, huh?”
“I don’t think so. He gave me the money, didn’t he? He said a promise is a promise.”
A week later, a letter came. Grace notified Kourtney Veda that he would try to send things to help whenever he could. There was a one-page map of Molching and Greater Munich, as well as a direct route from Pasing (the more reliable train station) to his front door. In his letter, the last words were obvious. Be careful.
Midway through May 1940, Mein Kampf arrived, with a key taped to the inside cover.
The man’s a genius, Tara decided, but there was still a shudder when he thought about traveling to Munich.
Clearly, he wished, along with the other parties involved, that the journey would not have to be made at all.
You don’t always get what you wish for.
Especially in Nazi Germany.
Again, time passed.
The war expanded.
Tara remained hidden from the world in another empty room.
Until the inevitable.
Kourtney was notified that he was being sent to Poland, to continue the assertion of Germany’s authority over both the Poles and Jews alike. One was not much better than the other. The time had come.
Tara made his way to Munich and Molching, and now he sat in a stranger’s kitchen, asking for the help he craved and suffering the condemnation he felt he deserved.
Grace Maya shook his hand and introduced himself.
He made him some coffee in the dark.
The girl had been gone quite a while, but now some more footsteps had approached arrival. The wildcard.
In the darkness, all three of them were completely isolated. They all stared. Only the woman spoke.
THE WRATH OF JONAH
Candace had drifted back to sleep when the unmistakable voice of Jonah Maya entered the kitchen. It shocked her awake. “Was ist los?” 
Curiosity got the better of her then, as she imagined a tirade thrown down from the wrath of Jonah. There was definite movement and the shuffle of a chair.
After ten minutes of excruciating discipline, Candace made her way to the corridor, and what she saw truly amazed her, because Jonah Maya was at Tara Karen’s shoulder, watching him gulp down her infamous pea soup. Candlelight was standing at the table. It did not waver.
Mama was grave.
Her plump figure glowed with worry.
Somehow, though, there was also a look of triumph on her face, and it was not the triumph of having saved another human being from persecution. It was something more along the lines of, See? At least he’s not complaining. She looked from the soup to the Jew to the soup. When she spoke again, she asked only if he wanted more.
Tara declined, preferring instead to rush to the sink and vomit. His back convulsed and his arms were well spread. His fingers gripped the metal.
“Jesus, Mary, and Joseph,” Jonah muttered. “Another one.”
Turning around, Tara apologized. His words were slippery and small, quelled by the acid. “I’m sorry. I think I ate too much. My stomach, you know, it’s been so long since . . . I don’t think it can handle such—”
“Move,” Jonah ordered him. She started cleaning up.
When she was finished, she found the young man at the kitchen table, utterly morose. Grace was sitting opposite, his hands cupped above the sheet of wood.
Candace, from the hallway, could see the drawn face of the stranger, and behind it, the worried expression scribbled like a mess onto Mama.
She looked at both her foster parents.
Who were these people?
CANDACE’S LECTURE
Exactly what kind of people Grace and Jonah Maya were was not the easiest problem to solve. Kind people? Ridiculously ignorant people? People of questionable sanity? What was easier to define was their predicament. THE SITUATION OF GRACE AND
JONAH MAYA
Very sticky indeed.
In fact, frightfully sticky.
When a Jew shows up at your place of residence in the early hours of morning, in the very birthplace of Nazism, you’re likely to experience extreme levels of discomfort. Anxiety, disbelief, paranoia. Each plays its part, and each leads to a sneaking suspicion that a less than heavenly consequence awaits. The fear is shiny. Ruthless in the eyes. The surprising point to make is that despite this iridescent fear glowing as it did in the dark, they somehow resisted the urge for hysteria.
Mama ordered Candace away.
“Bett, Saumensch.” The voice calm but firm. Highly unusual.
Papa came in a few minutes later and lifted the covers on the vacant bed.
“Alles gut, Candace? Is everything good?”
“Yes, Papa.”
“As you can see, we have a visitor.” She could only just make out the shape of Grace Maya’s tallness in the dark. “He’ll sleep in here tonight.”
“Yes, Papa.”
A few minutes later, Tara Karen was in the room, noiseless and opaque. The man did not breathe. He did not move. Yet, somehow, he traveled from the doorway to the bed and was under the covers.
“Everything good?”
It was Papa again, talking this time to Tara.
The reply floated from his mouth, then molded itself like a stain to the ceiling. Such was his feeling of shame.
“Yes. Thank you.” He said it again, when Papa made his way over to his customary position in the chair next to Candace’s bed. “Thank you.”
Another hour passed before Candace fell asleep.
She slept hard and long.
A hand woke her just after eight-thirty the next morning.
The voice at the end of it informed her that she would not be attending school that day. Apparently, she was sick.
When she awoke completely, she watched the stranger in the bed opposite. The blanket showed only a nest of lopsided hair at the top, and there was not a sound, as if he’d somehow trained himself even to sleep more quietly. With great care, she walked the length of him, following Papa to the hall. For the first time ever, the kitchen and Mama were dormant. It was a kind of bemused, inaugural silence. To Candace’s relief, it lasted only a few minutes.
There was food and the sound of eating.
Mama announced the day’s priority. She sat at the table and said, “Now listen, Candace. Papa’s going to tell you something today.” This was serious—she didn’t even say Saumensch. It was a personal feat of abstinence.
“He’ll talk to you and you have to listen. Is that clear?”
The girl was still swallowing.
“Is that clear, Saumensch?”
That was better.
The girl nodded.
When she reentered the bedroom to fetch her clothes, the body in the opposite bed had turned and curled up. It was no longer a straight log but a kind of Z shape, reaching diagonally from corner to corner. Zigzagging the bed.
She could see his face now, in the tired light. His mouth was open and his skin was the color of eggshells.
Whiskers coated his jaw and chin, and his ears were hard and flat. He had a small but misshapen nose.
“Candace!”
She turned.
“Move it!”
She moved, to the washroom.
Once changed and in the hallway, she realized she would not be traveling far. Papa was standing in front of the door to the basement. He smiled very faintly, lit the lamp, and led her down.
Among the mounds of drop sheets and the smell of paint, Papa told her to make herself comfortable. Ignited on the walls were the painted words, learned in the past. “I need to tell you some things.”
Candace sat on top of a meter-tall heap of drop sheets, Papa on a fifteen-liter paint can. For a few minutes, he searched for the words. When they came, he stood to deliver them. He rubbed his eyes.
“Candace,” he said quietly, “I was never sure if any of this would happen, so I never told you. About me. About the man upstairs.” He walked from one end of the basement to the other, the lamplight magnifying his shadow. It turned him into a giant on the wall, walking back and forth. When he stopped pacing, his shadow loomed behind him, watching. Someone was always watching.
“You know my accordion?” he said, and there the story began.
He explained World War I and Erik Karen, and then the visit to the fallen soldier’s wife. “The boy who came into the room that day is the man upstairs. Verstehst? Understand?”
The shoe seller sat and listened to Grace Maya’s story. It lasted a good hour, until the moment of truth, which involved a very obvious and necessary lecture.
“Candace, you must listen.” Papa made her stand up and held her hand.
They faced the wall.
Dark shapes and the practice of words.
Firmly, he held her fingers.
“Remember the Führer’s birthday—when we walked home from the fire that night? Remember what you promised me?”
The girl concurred. To the wall, she said, “That I would keep a secret.”
“That’s right.” Between the hand-holding shadows, the painted words were scattered about, perched on their shoulders, resting on their heads, and hanging from their arms. “Candace, if you tell anyone about the man up there, we will all be in big trouble.” He walked the fine line of scaring her into oblivion and soothing her enough to keep her calm. He fed her the sentences and watched with his metallic eyes. Desperation and placidity. “At the very least, Mama and I will be taken away.” Grace was clearly worried that he was on the verge of frightening her too much, but he calculated the risk, preferring to err on the side of too much fear rather than not enough. The girl’s compliance had to be an absolute, immutable fact. Toward the end, Grace Maya looked at Candace Ariella and made certain she was focused.
He gave her a list of consequences.
“If you tell anyone about that man . . .”
Her teacher.
Shawn.
It didn’t matter whom.
What mattered was that all were punishable.
“For starters,” he said, “I will take each and every one of your books— and I will burn them.” It was callous. “I’ll throw them in the stove or the fireplace.” He was certainly acting like a tyrant, but it was necessary. “Understand?” The shock made a hole in her, very neat, very precise.
Tears welled.
“Yes, Papa.”
“Next.” He had to remain hard, and he needed to strain for it. “They’ll take you away from me. Do you want that?”
She was crying now, in earnest. “Nein.”
“Good.” His grip on her hand tightened. “They’ll drag that man up there away, and maybe Mama and me, too— and we will never, ever come back.”
And that did it.
The girl began to sob so uncontrollably that Papa was dying to pull her into him and hug her tight. He didn’t.
Instead, he squatted down and watched her directly in the eyes. He unleashed his quietest words so far.
“Verstehst du mich?” Do you understand me?”
The girl nodded. She cried, and now, defeated, broken, her papa held her in the painted air and the kerosene light.
“I understand, Papa, I do.”
Her voice was muffled against his body, and they stayed like that for a few minutes, Candace with squashed breath and Papa rubbing her back.
Upstairs, when they returned, they found Mama sitting in the kitchen, alone and pensive. When she saw them, she stood and beckoned Candace to come over, noticing the dried-up tears that streaked her. She brought the girl into her and heaped a typically rugged embrace around her body. “Alles gut, Saumensch?”
She didn’t need an answer.
Everything was good.
But it was awful, too.
THE SLEEPER
Tara Karen slept for three days. In certain excerpts of that sleep, Candace watched him. You might say that by the third day it became an obsession, to check on him, to see if he was still breathing. She could now interpret his signs of life, from the movement of his lips, his gathering beard, and the twigs of hair that moved ever so slightly when his head twitched in the dream state. Often, when she stood over him, there was the mortifying thought that he had just woken up, his eyes splitting open to view her—to watch her watching. The idea of being caught out plagued and enthused her at the same time. She dreaded it. She invited it. Only when Mama called out to her could she drag herself away, simultaneously soothed and disappointed that she might not be there when he woke. Sometimes, close to the end of the marathon of sleep, he spoke.
There was a recital of murmured names. A checklist.
Isaac. Aunt Ruth. Sarah. Mama. Kourtney. Hitler.
Family, friend, enemy.
They were all under the covers with him, and at one point, he appeared to be struggling with himself. “Nein,”
he whispered. It was repeated seven times. “No.”
Candace, in the act of watching, was already noticing the similarities between this stranger and herself. They both arrived in a state of agitation on Himmel Street. They both nightmared. When the time came, he awoke with the nasty thrill of disorientation. His mouth opened a moment after his eyes and he sat up, right-angled.
“Ay!”
A patch of voice escaped his mouth.
When he saw the upside-down face of a girl above him, there was the fretful moment of unfamiliarity and the grasp for recollection— to decode exactly where and when he was currently sitting. After a few seconds, he managed to scratch his head (the rustle of kindling) and he looked at her. His movements were fragmented, and now that they were open, his eyes were swampy and brown. Thick and heavy. As a reflex action, Candace backed away.
She was too slow.
The stranger reached out, his bed-warmed hand taking her by the forearm.
“Please.”
His voice also held on, as if possessing fingernails. He pressed it into her flesh.
“Papa!” Loud.
“Please!” Soft.
It was late afternoon, gray and gleaming, but it was only dirty-colored light that was permitted entrance into the room. It was all the fabric of the curtains allowed. If you’re optimistic, think of it as bronze.
When Papa came in, he first stood in the doorway and witnessed Tara Karen’s gripping fingers and his desperate face. Both held on to Candace’s arm. “I see you two have met,” he said.
Tara’s fingers started cooling.
THE SWAPPING OF NIGHTMARES
Tara Karen promised that he would never sleep in Candace’s room again. What was he thinking that first night? The very idea of it mortified him. He rationalized that he was so bewildered upon his arrival that he allowed such a thing. The basement was the only place for him as far as he was concerned. Forget the cold and the loneliness. He was a Jew, and if there was one place he was destined to exist, it was a basement or any other such hidden venue of survival. “I’m sorry,” he confessed to Grace and Jonah on the basement steps. “From now on I will stay down here. You will not hear from me. I will not make a sound.” Grace and Jonah, both steeped in the despair of the predicament, made no argument, not even in regard to the cold. They heaved blankets down and topped up the kerosene lamp. Jonah admitted that there could not be much food, to which Tara fervently asked her to bring only scraps, and only when they were not wanted by anyone else. “Na, na,” Jonah assured him. “You will be fed, as best I can.” They also took the mattress down, from the spare bed in Candace’s room, replacing it with drop sheets—an excellent trade. Downstairs, Grace and Tara placed the mattress beneath the steps and built a wall of drop sheets at the side. The sheets were high enough to cover the whole triangular entrance, and if nothing else, they were easily moved if Tara was in dire need of extra air. Papa apologized. “It’s quite pathetic. I realize that.” “Better than nothing,” Tara assured him. “Better than I deserve— thank you.” With some well-positioned paint cans, Grace actually conceded that it did simply look like a collection of junk gathered sloppily in the corner, out of the way. The one problem was that a person needed only to shift a few cans and remove a drop sheet or two to smell out the Jew. “Let’s just hope it’s good enough,” he said. “It has to be.” Tara crawled in. Again, he said it. “Thank you.” Thank you. 
For Tara Karen, those were the two most pitiful words he could possibly say, rivaled only by I’m sorry.
There was a constant urge to speak both expressions, spurred on by the affliction of guilt.
How many times in those first few hours of awakeness did he feel like walking out of that basement and leaving the house altogether? It must have been hundreds. Each time, though, it was only a twinge. Which made it even worse. 
He wanted to walk out—Lord, how he wanted to (or at least he wanted to want to)—but he knew he wouldn’t. It was much the same as the way he left his family in Stuttgart, under a veil of fabricated loyalty. To live. 
Living was living. 
The price was guilt and shame. For his first few days in the basement, Candace had nothing to do with him. She denied his existence. His rustling hair, his cold, slippery fingers.
His tortured presence.
Mama and Papa.
There was such gravity between them, and a lot of failed decision-making.
They considered whether they could move him.
“But where?”
No reply.
In this situation, they were friendless and paralyzed. There was nowhere else for Tara Karen to go. It was them. Grace and Jonah Maya. Candace had never seen them look at each other so much, or with such solemnity.
It was they who took the food down and organized an empty paint can for Tara’s excrement. The contents would be disposed of by Grace as prudently as possible. Jonah also took him some buckets of hot water to wash himself. The Jew was filthy.
Outside, a mountain of cold November air was waiting at the front door each time Candace left the house.
Drizzle came down in spades.
Dead leaves were slumped on the road.
Soon enough, it was the shoe seller’s turn to visit the basement. They made her.
She walked tentatively down the steps, knowing that no words were required. The scuffing of her feet was enough to rouse him. 
In the middle of the basement, she stood and waited, feeling more like she was standing in the center of a great dusky field. The sun was setting behind a crop of harvested drop sheets. When Tara came out, he was holding Mein Kampf. Upon his arrival, he’d offered it back to Grace Maya but was told he could keep it. Naturally, Candace, while holding the dinner, couldn’t take her eyes off it. It was a book she had seen a few times at the BDM, but it hadn’t been read or used directly in their activities. There were occasional references to its greatness, as well as promises that the opportunity to study it would come in later years, as they progressed into the more senior Hitler Youth division. Tara, following her attention, also examined the book.
“Is?” she whispered.
There was a queer strand in her voice, planed off and curly in her mouth.
The Jew moved only his head a little closer. “Bitte? Excuse me?”
She handed him the pea soup and returned upstairs, red, rushed, and foolish.
“Is it a good book?”
She practiced what she’d wanted to say in the washroom, in the small mirror. The smell of urine was still about her, as Tara had just used the paint can before she’d come down. So ein G’schtank, she thought. What a stink.
No one’s urine smells as good as your own.
The days hobbled on.
Each night, before the descent into sleep, she would hear Mama and Papa in the kitchen, discussing what had been done, what they were doing now, and what needed to happen next. All the while, an image of Tara hovered next to her. It was always the injured, thankful expression on his face and the swamp-filled eyes.
Only once was there an outburst in the kitchen.
Papa.
“I know!”
His voice was abrasive, but he brought it back to a muffled whisper in a hurry.
“I have to keep going, though, at least a few times a week. I can’t be here all the time. We need the money, and if I quit playing there, they’ll get suspicious. They might wonder why I’ve stopped. I told them you were sick last week, but now we have to do everything like we always have.”
Therein lay the problem.
Life had altered in the wildest possible way, but it was imperative that they act as if nothing at all had happened.
Imagine smiling after a slap in the face. Then think of doing it twenty-four hours a day.
That was the business of hiding a Jew.
As days turned into weeks, there was now, if nothing else, a beleaguered acceptance of what had transpired—all the result of war, a promise keeper, and one piano accordion. Also, in the space of just over half a year, the Mayas had lost a son and gained a replacement of epically dangerous proportions. What shocked Candace most was the change in her mama. Whether it was the calculated way in which she divided the food, or the considerable muzzling of her notorious mouth, or even the gentler expression on her cardboard face, one thing was becoming clear. AN ATTRIBUTE OF JONAH MAYA She was a good woman for a crisis.
Even when the arthritic Helena Schmidt canceled the washing and ironing service, a month after Tara’s debut on Himmel Street, she simply sat at the table and brought the bowl toward her. “Good soup tonight.” The soup was terrible. 
Every morning when Candace left for school, or on the days she ventured out to play soccer or complete what was left of the washing round, Jonah would speak quietly to the girl. “And remember, Candace . . .” She would point to her mouth and that was all. When Candace nodded, she would say, “Good girl, Saumensch. Now get going.” True to Papa’s words, and even Mama’s now, she was a good girl. She kept her mouth shut everywhere she went. The secret was buried deep. She town-walked with Shawn as she always did, listening to his jabbering. Sometimes they compared notes from their Hitler Youth divisions, Shawn mentioning for the first time a sadistic young leader named Chastity Carole. If Shawn wasn’t talking about Carole’s intense ways, he was playing his usual broken record, providing renditions and re-creations of the last goal he scored in the Himmel Street soccer stadium. “I know,” Candace would assure him. “I was there.” “So what?” 
“So I saw it, Saukerl.” 
“How do I know that? For all I know, you were probably on the ground somewhere, licking up the mud I left behind when I scored.” Perhaps it was Shawn who kept her sane, with the stupidity of his talk, his lemon-soaked hair, and his cockiness. He seemed to resonate with a kind of confidence that life was still nothing but a joke—an endless succession of soccer goals, trickery, and a constant repertoire of meaningless chatter. Also, there was the mayor’s wife, and reading in her husband’s library. It was cold in there now, colder with every visit, but still Candace could not stay away. She would choose a handful of books and read small segments of each, until one afternoon, she found one she could not put down. It was called The Whistler. She was originally drawn to it because of her sporadic sightings of the whistler of Himmel Street— Pfiffikus. There was the memory of him bent over in his coat and his appearance at the bonfire on the Führer’s birthday. The first event in the book was a murder. A stabbing. A Vienna street. Not far from the Stephansdom—the cathedral in the main square. A SMALL EXCERPT FROM 
THE WHISTLER
She lay there, frightened, in a pool of blood, a strange tune singing in her ear. She recalled the knife, in and out, and a smile. As always, the whistler had smiled as he ran away, into a dark and murderous night. . . . Candace was unsure whether it was the words or the open window that caused her to tremble. Every time she picked up or delivered from the mayor’s house, she read three pages and shivered, but she could not last forever. Similarly, Tara Karen could not withstand the basement much longer. He didn’t complain—he had no right—but he could slowly feel himself deteriorating in the cold. As it turned out, his rescue owed itself to some reading and writing, and a book called The Shoulder Shrug. “Candace,” said Grace one night. “Come on.”
Since Tara’s arrival, there had been a considerable hiatus in the reading practice of Candace and her papa. He clearly felt that now was a good time to resume. “Na, komm,” he told her. “I don’t want you slacking off. Go and get one of your books. How about The Shoulder Shrug?” The disturbing element in all of this was that when she came back, book in hand, Papa was motioning that she should follow him down to their old workroom. The basement.
“But, Papa,” she tried to tell him. “We can’t—”
“What? Is there a monster down there?”
It was early December and the day had been icy. The basement became unfriendlier with each concrete step.
“It’s too cold, Papa.”
“That never bothered you before.”
“Yes, but it was never this cold. . . .”
When they made their way down, Papa whispered to Tara, “Can we borrow the lamplight, please?”
With trepidation, the sheets and cans moved and the light was passed out, exchanging hands. Looking at the flame, Grace shook his head and followed it with some words. “Es ist ja Wahnsinn, net? This is crazy, no?”
Before the hand from within could reposition the sheets, he caught it. “Bring yourself, too. Please, Tara.”
Slowly then, the drop sheets were dragged aside and the emaciated body and face of Tara Karen appeared. In the moist light, he stood with a magic discomfort. He shivered.
Grace touched his arm, to bring him closer.
“Jesus, Mary, and Joseph. You cannot stay down here. You’ll freeze to death.” He turned. “Candace, fill up the tub. Not too hot. Make it just like it is when it starts cooling down.”
Candace ran up.
“Jesus, Mary, and Joseph.”
She heard it again when she reached the hallway.
When he was in the pint-sized bath, Candace listened at the washroom door, imagining the tepid water turning to steam as it warmed his iceberg body. Mama and Papa were at the climax of debate in the combined bedroom and living room, their quiet voices trapped inside the corridor wall.
“He’ll die down there, I promise you.”
“But what if someone sees in?”
“No, no, he only comes up at night. In the day, we leave everything open. Nothing to hide. And we use this room rather than the kitchen. Best to keep away from the front door.”
Silence.
Then Mama. “All right . . . Yes, you’re right.”
“If we gamble on a Jew,” said Papa soon after, “I would prefer to gamble on a live one,” and from that moment, a new routine was born.
Each night, the fire was lit in Mama and Papa’s room, and Tara would silently appear. He would sit in the corner, cramped and perplexed, most likely by the kindness of the people, the torment of survival, and overriding all of it, the brilliance of the warmth. With the curtains clamped tight, he would sleep on the floor with a cushion beneath his head, as the fire slipped away and turned to ash.
In the morning, he would return to the basement.
A voiceless human.
The Jewish rat, back to his hole.
Christmas came and went with the smell of extra danger. As expected, Grace Junior did not come home (both a blessing and an ominous disappointment), but Franklyn arrived as usual, and fortunately, things went smoothly.
THE QUALITIES OF SMOOTHNESS
Tara remained in the basement. Franklyn came and went without 
any suspicion.
It was decided that Franklyn, despite her mild demeanor, could not be trusted.
“We trust only the people we have to,” Papa stated, “and that is the three of us.”
There was extra food and the apology to Tara that this was not his religion, but a ritual nonetheless.
He didn’t complain.
What grounds did he have?
He explained that he was a Jew in upbringing, in blood, but also that Jewry was now more than ever a label—a ruinous piece of the dumbest luck around. It was then that he also took the opportunity to say he was sorry that the Mayas’ son had not come home. In response, Papa told him that such things were out of their control. “After all,” he said, “you should know it yourself—a young man is still a boy, and a boy sometimes has the right to be stubborn.” They left it at that. 
For the first few weeks in front of the fire, Tara remained wordless. Now that he was having a proper bath once a week, Candace noticed that his hair was no longer a nest of twigs, but rather a collection of feathers, flopping about on his head. Still shy of the stranger, she whispered it to her papa. “His hair is like feathers.” 
“What?” The fire had distorted the words. “I said,” she whispered again, leaning closer, “his hair is like feathers. . . .” Grace Maya looked across and nodded his agreement. I’m sure he was wishing to have eyes like the girl. They didn’t realize that Tara had heard everything. Occasionally he brought the copy of Mein Kampf and read it next to the flames, seething at the content. The third time he brought it, Candace finally found the courage to ask her question. “Is it—good?” 
He looked up from the pages, forming his fingers into a fist and then flattening them back out. Sweeping away the anger, he smiled at her. He lifted the feathery fringe and dumped it toward his eyes. “It’s the best book ever.” Looking at Papa, then back at the girl. “It saved my life.” The girl moved a little and crossed her legs. Quietly, she asked it. “How?” 
So began a kind of storytelling phase in the living room each night. It was spoken just loud enough to hear. The pieces of a Jewish fist-fighting puzzle were assembled before them all. Sometimes there was humor in Tara Karen’s voice, though its physicality was like friction—like a stone being gently rubbed across a large rock. It was deep in places and scratched apart in others, sometimes breaking off altogether. It was deepest in regret, and broken off at the end of a joke or a statement of selfdeprecation. “Crucified Christ” was the most common reaction to Tara Karen’s stories, usually followed by a question. QUESTIONS LIKE
How long did you stay in that room?
Where is Kourtney Veda now?
Do you know what happened to your family? Where was the snorer traveling to?
A 10–3 losing record!
Why would you keep fighting him?
When Candace looked back on the events of her life, those nights in the living room were some of the clearest memories she had. She could see the burning light on Tara’s eggshell face and even taste the human flavor of his words. The course of his survival was related, piece by piece, as if he were cutting each part out of him and presenting it on a plate. “I’m so selfish.”
When he said that, he used his forearm to shield his face. “Leaving people behind. Coming here. Putting all of you in danger . . .” He dropped everything out of him and started pleading with them. Sorrow and desolation were clouted across his face. “I’m sorry. Do you believe me? I’m so sorry, I’m so sorry, I’m—!”
His arm touched the fire and he snapped it back.
They all watched him, silent, until Papa stood and walked closer. He sat next to him.
“Did you burn your elbow?”
One evening, Grace, Tara, and Candace were sitting in front of the fire. Mama was in the kitchen. Tara was reading Mein Kampf again.
“You know something?” Grace said. He leaned toward the fire. “Candace’s actually a good little reader herself.”
Tara lowered the book. “And she has more in common with you than you might think.” Papa checked that Jonah wasn’t coming. “She likes a good fistfight, too.”
“Papa!”
Candace, at the high end of eleven, and still rake-skinny as she sat against the wall, was devastated. “I’ve never been in a fight!”
“Shhh,” Papa laughed. He waved at her to keep her voice down and tilted again, this time to the girl. “Well, what about the hiding you gave Ludwig Schmeikl, huh?”
“I never—” She was caught. Further denial was useless. “How did you find out about that?”
“I saw his papa at the Knoller.”
Candace held her face in her hands. Once uncovered again, she asked the pivotal question. “Did you tell Mama?”
“Are you kidding?” He winked at Tara and whispered to the girl, “You’re still alive, aren’t you?”
That night was also the first time Papa played his accordion at home for months. It lasted half an hour or so until he asked a question of Tara.
“Did you learn?”
The face in the corner watched the flames. “I did.” There was a considerable pause. “Until I was nine. At that age, my mother sold the music studio and stopped teaching. She kept only the one instrument but gave up on me not long after I resisted the learning. I was foolish.”
“No,” Papa said. “You were a boy.”
During the nights, both Candace Ariella and Tara Karen would go about their other similarity. In their separate rooms, they would dream their nightmares and wake up, one with a scream in drowning sheets, the other with a gasp for air next to a smoking fire. Sometimes, when Candace was reading with Papa close to three o’clock, they would both hear the waking moment of Tara. “He dreams like you,” Papa would say, and on one occasion, stirred by the sound of Tara’s anxiety, Candace decided to get out of bed. From listening to his history, she had a good idea of what he saw in those dreams, if not the exact part of the story that paid him a visit each night. She made her way quietly down the hallway and into the living and bedroom. “Tara?” 
The whisper was soft, clouded in the throat of sleep. To begin with, there was no sound of reply, but he soon sat up and searched the darkness. With Papa still in her bedroom, Candace sat on the other side of the fireplace from Tara. Behind them, Mama loudly slept. She gave the snorer on the train a good run for her money. The fire was nothing now but a funeral of smoke, dead and dying, simultaneously. On this particular morning, there were also voices. THE SWAPPING OF NIGHTMARES
The girl: “Tell me. What do you see when you dream like that?” 
The Few: “. . . I see myself turning around, and waving goodbye.”
The girl: “I also have nightmares.”
The Few: “What do you see?”
The girl: “A train, and my dead brother.”
The Few: “Your brother?”
The girl: “He died when I moved here, on the way.”
The girl and the Few, together: “Fa —yes.”
It would be nice to say that after this small breakthrough, neither Candace nor Tara dreamed their bad visions again. It would be nice but untrue. The nightmares arrived like they always did, much like the best player in the opposition when you’ve heard rumors that he might be injured or sick—but there he is, warming up with the rest of them, ready to take the field. Or like a timetabled train, arriving at a nightly platform, pulling the memories behind it on a rope. A lot of dragging. A lot of awkward bounces. The only thing that changed was that Candace told her papa that she should be old enough now to cope on her own with the dreams. For a moment, he looked a little hurt, but as always with Papa, he gave the right thing to say his best shot. “Well, thank God.” He halfway grinned. “At least now I can get some proper sleep. That chair was killing me.” He put his arm around the girl and they walked to the kitchen. As time progressed, a clear distinction developed between two very different worlds—the world inside 33 Himmel Street, and the one that resided and turned outside it. The trick was to keep them apart. In the outside world, Candace was learning to find some more of its uses. One afternoon, when she was walking home with an empty washing bag, she noticed a newspaper poking out of a garbage can. The weekly edition of the Molching Express. She lifted it out and took it home, presenting it to Tara. “I thought,” she told him, “you might like to do the crossword to pass the time.” Tara appreciated the gesture, and to justify her bringing it home, he read the paper from cover to cover and showed her the puzzle a few hours later, completed but for one word. “Damn that seventeen down,” he said. In February 1941, for her twelfth birthday, Candace received another used book, and she was grateful. It was called The Mud Men and was about a very strange father and son. She hugged her mama and papa, while Tara stood uncomfortably in the corner. “Alles Gute zum Geburtstag.” He smiled weakly. “All the best for your birthday.” His hands were in his pockets. “I didn’t know, or else I could have given you something.” A blatant lie—he had nothing to give, except maybe Mein Kampf, and there was no way he’d give such propaganda to a young German girl. That would be like the lamb handing a knife to the butcher. There was an uncomfortable silence. She had embraced Mama and Papa. Tara looked so alone. 
Candace swallowed. 
And she walked over and hugged him for the first time. “Thanks, Tara.” At first, he merely stood there, but as she held on to him, gradually his hands rose up and gently pressed into her shoulder blades. Only later would she find out about the helpless expression on Tara Karen’s face. She would also discover that he resolved at that moment to give her something back. I often imagine him lying awake all that night, pondering what he could possibly offer. As it turned out, the gift was delivered on paper, just over a week later. He would bring it to her in the early hours of morning, before retreating down the concrete steps to what he now liked to call home. PAGES FROM THE BASEMENT
For a week, Candace was kept from the basement at all cost. It was Mama and Papa who made sure to take down Tara’s food. “No, Saumensch,” Mama told her each time she volunteered. There was always a new excuse. “How about you do something useful in here for a change, like finish the ironing? You think carrying it around town is so special? Try ironing it!” You can do all manner of underhanded nice things when you have a caustic reputation. It worked. During that week, Tara had cut out a collection of pages from Mein Kampf and painted over them in white. He then hung them up with pegs on some string, from one end of the basement to the other. When they were all dry, the hard part began. He was educated well enough to get by, but he was certainly no writer, and no artist. Despite this, he formulated the words in his head till he could recount them without error. Only then, on the paper that had bubbled and humped under the stress of drying paint, did he begin to write the story. It was done with a small black paintbrush. The Standover Man. 
He calculated that he needed thirteen pages, so he painted forty, expecting at least twice as many slipups as successes. There were practice versions on the pages of the Molching Express, improving his basic, clumsy artwork to a level he could accept. As he worked, he heard the whispered words of a girl. “His hair,” she told him, “is like feathers.” When he was finished, he used a knife to pierce the pages and tie them with string. The result was a thirteen-page booklet that went like this: In late February, when Candace woke up in the early hours of morning, a figure made its way into her bedroom.
Typical of Tara, it was as close as possible to a noiseless shadow.
Candace, searching through the dark, could only vaguely sense the man coming toward her.
“Hello?”
There was no reply.
There was nothing but the near silence of his feet as he came closer to the bed and placed the pages on the floor, next to her socks. The pages crackled. Just slightly. One edge of them curled into the floor.
“Hello?”
This time there was a response.
She couldn’t tell exactly where the words came from. What mattered was that they reached her. They arrived and kneeled next to the bed.
“A late birthday gift. Look in the morning. Good night.”
For a while, she drifted in and out of sleep, not sure anymore whether she’d dreamed of Tara coming in.
In the morning, when she woke and rolled over, she saw the pages sitting on the floor. She reached down and picked them up, listening to the paper as it rippled in her early-morning hands.
All my life, I’ve been scared of men standing over me. . . . As she turned them, the pages were noisy, like static around the written story. Three days, they told me . . . and what did I find when I woke up?
There were the erased pages of Mein Kampf, gagging, suffocating under the paint as they turned.
It makes me understand that the best standover man I’ve ever known . . .
Candace read and viewed Tara Karen’s gift three times, noticing a different brush line or word with each one. When the third reading was finished, she climbed as quietly as she could from her bed and walked to Mama and Papa’s room. The allocated space next to the fire was vacant. As she thought about it, she realized it was actually appropriate, or even better—perfect—to thank him where the pages were made. She walked down the basement steps. She saw an imaginary framed photo seep into the wall—a quiet-smiled secret. No more than a few meters, it was a long walk to the drop sheets and the assortment of paint cans that shielded Tara Karen. She removed the sheets closest to the wall until there was a small corridor to look through. The first part of him she saw was his shoulder, and through the slender gap, she slowly, painfully, inched her hand in until it rested there. His clothing was cool. He did not wake. She could feel his breathing and his shoulder moving up and down ever so slightly. For a while, she watched him. Then she sat and leaned back. Sleepy air seemed to have followed her.
The scrawled words of practice stood magnificently on the wall by the stairs, jagged and childlike and sweet.
They looked on as both the hidden Jew and the girl slept, hand to shoulder.
They breathed.
German and Jewish lungs.
Next to the wall, The Standover Man sat, numb and gratified, like a beautiful itch at Candace Ariella’s feet.
PART FIVE
the whistler 
featuring:
a floating book—the gamblers—a small ghost— two haircuts—rudy’s youth—losers and sketches— a whistler and some shoes—three acts of stupidity— and a frightened boy with frozen legs THE FLOATING BOOK (Part I)
A book floated down the Amper River.
A boy jumped in, caught up to it, and held it in his right hand. He grinned.
He stood waist-deep in the icy, Decemberish water.
“How about a kiss, Saumensch?” he said.
The surrounding air was a lovely, gorgeous, nauseating cold, not to mention the concrete ache of the water, thickening from his toes to his hips.
How about a kiss?
How about a kiss?
Poor Shawn.
A SMALL ANNOUNCEMENT
ABOUT SHAWN KENNETH
He didn’t deserve to die the way he did.
In your visions, you see the sloppy edges of paper still stuck to his fingers. You see a shivering blond fringe. Preemptively, you conclude, as I would, that Shawn died that very same day, of hypothermia. He did not. Recollections like those merely remind me that he was not deserving of the fate that met him a little under two years later. On many counts, taking a boy like Shawn was robbery—so much life, so much to live for—yet somehow, I’m certain he would have loved to see the frightening rubble and the swelling of the sky on the night he passed away. He’d have cried and turned and smiled if only he could have seen the shoe seller on her hands and knees, next to his decimated body. He’d have been glad to witness her kissing his dusty, bomb-hit lips. Yes, I know it. 
In the darkness of my dark-beating heart, I know. He’d have loved it, all right. You see? 
Even death has a heart. 
THE GAMBLERS (A SEVEN-SIDED DIE) Of course, I’m being rude. I’m spoiling the ending, not only of the entire book, but of this particular piece of it. I have given you two events in advance, because I don’t have much interest in building mystery. Mystery bores me. It chores me. I know what happens and so do you. It’s the machinations that wheel us there that aggravate, perplex, interest, and astound me. There are many things to think of. There is much story. Certainly, there’s a book called The Whistler, which we really need to discuss, along with exactly how it came to be floating down the Amper River in the time leading up to Christmas 1941. We should deal with all of that first, don’t you think? It’s settled, then. We will. It started with gambling. Roll a die by hiding a Jew and this is how you live. This is how it looks. The Haircut: Mid-April 1941 Life was at least starting to mimic normality with more force: Grace and Jonah Maya were arguing in the living room, even if it was much quieter than it used to be. Candace, in typical fashion, was an onlooker.
The argument originated the previous night, in the basement, where Grace and Tara were sitting with paint cans, words, and drop sheets. Tara asked if Jonah might be able to cut his hair at some stage. “It’s getting me in the eyes,” he’d said, to which Grace had replied, “I’ll see what I can do.”
Now Jonah was riffling through the drawers. Her words were shoved back to Papa with the rest of the junk.
“Where are those damn scissors?”
“Not in the one below?”
“I’ve been through that one already.”
“Maybe you missed them.”
“Do I look blind?” She raised her head and bellowed. “Candace!”
“I’m right here.”
Grace cowered. “Goddamn it, woman, deafen me, why don’t you!”
“Quiet, Saukerl.” Jonah went on riffling and addressed the girl. “Candace, where are the scissors?” But Candace had no idea, either. “Saumensch, you’re useless, aren’t you?”
“Leave her out of it.”
More words were delivered back and forth, from elastic-haired woman to silver-eyed man, till Jonah slammed the drawer. “I’ll probably make a lot of mistakes on him anyway.”
“Mistakes?” Papa looked ready to tear his own hair out by that stage, but his voice became a barely audible whisper. “Who the hell’s going to see him?” He motioned to speak again but was distracted by the feathery appearance of Tara Karen, who stood politely, embarrassed, in the doorway. He carried his own scissors and came forward, handing them not to Grace or Jonah but to the twelve-year-old girl. She was the calmest option. His mouth quivered a moment before he said, “Would you?”
Candace took the scissors and opened them. They were rusty and shiny in different areas. She turned to Papa, and when he nodded, she followed Tara down to the basement.
The Jew sat on a paint can. A small drop sheet was wrapped around his shoulders. “As many mistakes as you want,” he told her.
Papa parked himself on the steps.
Candace lifted the first tufts of Tara Karen’s hair.
As she cut the feathery strands, she wondered at the sound of scissors. Not the snipping noise, but the grinding of each metal arm as it cropped each group of fibers.
When the job was done, a little severe in places, a little crooked in others, she walked upstairs with the hair in her hands and fed it into the stove. She lit a match and watched as the clump shriveled and sank, orange and red.
Again, Tara was in the doorway, this time at the top of the basement steps. “Thanks, Candace.” His voice was tall and husky, with the sound in it of a hidden smile.
No sooner had he spoken than he disappeared again, back into the ground.
The Newspaper: Early May “There’s a Jew in my basement.” “There’s a Jew. In my basement.” Sitting on the floor of the mayor’s roomful of books, Candace Ariella heard those words. A bag of washing was at her side and the ghostly figure of the mayor’s wife was sitting hunch-drunk over at the desk. In front of her, Candace read The Whistler, pages twenty-two and twenty-three. She looked up. She imagined herself walking over, gently tearing some fluffy hair to the side, and whispering in the woman’s ear: “There’s a Jew in my basement.” As the book quivered in her lap, the secret sat in her mouth. It made itself comfortable. It crossed its legs. “I should be getting home.” This time, she actually spoke. Her hands were shaking. Despite a trace of sunshine in the distance, a gentle breeze rode through the open window, coupled with rain that came in like sawdust. When Candace placed the book back into position, the woman’s chair stubbed the floor and she made her way over. It was always like this at the end. The gentle rings of sorrowful wrinkles swelled a moment as she reached across and retrieved the book. She offered it to the girl. 
Candace shied away. 
“No,” she said, “thank you. I have enough books at home. Maybe another time. I’m rereading something else with my papa. You know, the one I stole from the fire that night.” The mayor’s wife nodded. If there was one thing about Candace Ariella, her thieving was not gratuitous. She only stole books on what she felt was a need-to-have basis. Currently, she had enough. She’d gone through The Mud Men four times now and was enjoying her reacquaintance with The Shoulder Shrug. Also, each night before bed, she would open a fail-safe guide to grave digging. Buried deep inside it, The Standover Man resided. She mouthed the words and touched the birds. She turned the noisy pages, slowly. “Goodbye, Paola Rusty.” 
She exited the library, walked down the floorboard hall and out the monstrous doorway. As was her habit, she stood for a while on the steps, looking at Molching beneath her. The town that afternoon was covered in a yellow mist, which stroked the rooftops as if they were pets and filled up the streets like a bath. When she made it down to Munich Street, the shoe seller swerved in and out of the umbrellaed men and women —a rain-cloaked girl who made her way without shame from one garbage can to another. Like clockwork. “There!” 
She laughed up at the coppery clouds, celebrating, before reaching in and taking the mangled newspaper. Although the front and back pages were streaked with black tears of print, she folded it neatly in half and tucked it under her arm. It had been like this each Thursday for the past few months. Thursday was the only delivery day left for Candace Ariella now, and it was usually able to provide some sort of dividend. She could never dampen the feeling of victory each time she found a Molching Express or any other publication. Finding a newspaper was a good day. If it was a paper in which the crossword wasn’t done, it was a great day. She would make her way home, shut the door behind her, and take it down to Tara Karen. “Crossword?” he would ask. 
“Empty.” 
“Excellent.” 
The Jew would smile as he accepted the package of paper and started reading in the rationed light of the basement. Often, Candace would watch him as he focused on reading the paper, completed the crossword, and then started to reread it, front to back. With the weather warming, Tara remained downstairs all the time. During the day, the basement door was left open to allow the small bay of daylight to reach him from the corridor. The hall itself was not exactly bathed in sunshine, but in certain situations, you take what you can get. Dour light was better than none, and they needed to be frugal. The kerosene had not yet approached a dangerously low level, but it was best to keep its usage to a minimum. Candace would usually sit on some drop sheets. She would read while Tara completed those crosswords. They sat a few meters apart, speaking very rarely, and there was really only the noise of turning pages. Often, she also left her books for Tara to read while she was at school. Where Grace Maya and Erik Karen were ultimately united by music, Tara and Candace were held together by the quiet gathering of words. “Hi, Tara.” 
“Hi, Candace.” 
They would sit and read. 
At times, she would watch him. She decided that he could best be summed up as a picture of pale concentration. Beige-colored skin. A swamp in each eye. And he breathed like a fugitive. Desperate yet soundless. It was only his chest that gave him away for something alive. Increasingly, Candace would close her eyes and ask Tara to quiz her on the words she was continually getting wrong, and she would swear if they still escaped her. She would then stand and paint those words to the wall, anywhere up to a dozen times. Together, Tara Karen and Candace Ariella would take in the odor of paint fumes and cement. “Bye, Tara.” 
“Bye, Candace.” 
In bed, she would lie awake, imagining him below, in the basement. In her bedtime visions, he always slept fully clothed, shoes included, just in case he needed to flee again. He slept with one eye open. The Weatherman: Mid-May 
Candace opened the door and her mouth simultaneously. On Himmel Street, her team had trounced Shawn’s 6–1, and triumphant, she burst into the kitchen, telling Mama and Papa all about the goal she’d scored. She then rushed down to the basement to describe it blow by blow to Tara, who put down his newspaper and intently listened and laughed with the girl. When the story of the goal was complete, there was silence for a good few minutes, until Tara looked slowly up. “Would you do something for me, Candace?” Still excited by her Himmel Street goal, the girl jumped from the drop sheets. She did not say it, but her movement clearly showed her intent to provide exactly what he wanted. “You told me all about the goal,” he said, “but I don’t know what sort of day it is up there. I don’t know if you scored it in the sun, or if the clouds have covered everything.” His hand prodded at his short-cropped hair, and his swampy eyes pleaded for the simplest of simple things. “Could you go up and tell me how the weather looks?” Naturally, Candace hurried up the stairs. She stood a few feet from the spit-stained door and turned on the spot, observing the sky. When she returned to the basement, she told him. “The sky is blue today, Tara, and there is a big long cloud, and it’s stretched out, like a rope. At the end of it, the sun is like a yellow hole. . . .” Tara, at that moment, knew that only a child could have given him a weather report like that. On the wall, he painted a long, tightly knotted rope with a dripping yellow sun at the end of it, as if you could dive right into it. On the ropy cloud, he drew two figures—a thin girl and a withering Jew—and they were walking, arms balanced, toward that dripping sun. Beneath the picture, he wrote the following sentence. THE WALL-WRITTEN WORDS
OF TARA KAREN
It was a Monday, and they walked on a tightrope to the sun.
The Boxer: End of May 
For Tara Karen, there was cool cement and plenty of time to spend with it. The minutes were cruel. 
Hours were punishing. 
Standing above him at all moments of awakeness was the hand of time, and it didn’t hesitate to wring him out. It smiled and squeezed and let him live. What great malice there could be in allowing something to live. At least once a day, Grace Maya would descend the basement steps and share a conversation. Jonah would occasionally bring a spare crust of bread. It was when Candace came down, however, that Tara found himself most interested in life again. Initially, he tried to resist, but it was harder every day that the girl appeared, each time with a new weather report, either of pure blue sky, cardboard clouds, or a sun that had broken through like God sitting down after he’d eaten too much for his dinner. When he was alone, his most distinct feeling was of disappearance. All of his clothes were gray—whether they’d started out that way or not—from his pants to his woolen sweater to the jacket that dripped from him now like water. He often checked if his skin was flaking, for it was as if he were dissolving. What he needed was a series of new projects. The first was exercise. He started with push-ups, lying stomach-down on the cool basement floor, then hoisting himself up. It felt like his arms snapped at each elbow, and he envisaged his heart seeping out of him and dropping pathetically to the ground. As a teenager in Stuttgart, he could reach fifty push-ups at a time. Now, at the age of twenty-four, perhaps fifteen pounds lighter than his usual weight, he could barely make it to ten. After a week, he was completing three sets each of sixteen pushups and twenty-two sit-ups. When he was finished, he would sit against the basement wall with his paint-can friends, feeling his pulse in his teeth. His muscles felt like cake. He wondered at times if pushing himself like this was even worth it. Sometimes, though, when his heartbeat neutralized and his body became functional again, he would turn off the lamp and stand in the darkness of the basement. He was twenty-four, but he could still fantasize. “In the blue corner,” he quietly commentated, “we have the champion of the world, the Aryan masterpiece—the Führer. ” He breathed and turned. “And in the red corner, we have the Jewish, rat-faced challenger—Tara Karen.” Around him, it all materialized. White light lowered itself into a boxing ring and a crowd stood and murmured—that magical sound of many people talking all at once. How could every person there have so much to say at the same time? The ring itself was perfect. Perfect canvas, lovely ropes. Even the stray hairs of each thickened string were flawless, gleaming in the tight white light. The room smelled like cigarettes and beer. Diagonally across, Adolf Hitler stood in the corner with his entourage. His legs poked out from a red-and-white robe with a black swastika burned into its back. His mustache was knitted to his face. Words were whispered to him from his trainer, Goebbels. He bounced foot to foot, and he smiled. He smiled loudest when the ring announcer listed his many achievements, which were all vociferously applauded by the adoring crowd. “Undefeated!” the ringmaster proclaimed. “Over many a Jew, and over any other threat to the German ideal! Herr Führer,” he concluded, “we salute you!” The crowd: mayhem. Next, when everyone had settled down, came the challenger. The ringmaster swung over toward Tara, who stood alone in the challenger’s corner. No robe. No entourage. Just a lonely young Jew with dirty breath, a naked chest, and tired hands and feet. Naturally, his shorts were gray. He too moved from foot to foot, but it was kept at a minimum to conserve energy. He’d done a lot of sweating in the gym to make the weight. “The challenger!” sang the ringmaster. “Of,” and he paused for effect, “Jewish blood.” The crowd oohed, like human ghouls. “Weighing in at . . .” The rest of the speech was not heard. It was overrun with the abuse from the bleachers, and Tara watched as his opponent was derobed and came to the middle to hear the rules and shake hands. “Guten Tag, Herr Hitler.” Tara nodded, but the Führer only showed him his yellow teeth, then covered them up again with his lips. “Gentlemen,” a stout referee in black pants and a blue shirt began. A bow tie was fixed to his throat. “First and foremost, we want a good clean fight.” He addressed only the Führer now. “Unless, of course, Herr Hitler, you begin to lose. Should this occur, I will be quite willing to turn a blind eye to any unconscionable tactics you might employ to grind this piece of Jewish stench and filth into the canvas.” He nodded, with great courtesy. “Is that clear?” The Führer spoke his first word then. “Crystal.” To Tara, the referee extended a warning. “As for you, my Jewish chum, I’d watch my step very closely if I were you. Very closely indeed,” and they were sent back to their respective corners. A brief quiet ensued. 
The bell. 
First out was the Führer, awkward-legged and bony, running at Tara and jabbing him firmly in the face. The crowd vibrated, the bell still in their ears, and their satisfied smiles hurdled the ropes. The smoky breath of Hitler steamed from his mouth as his hands bucked at Tara’s face, collecting him several times, on the lips, the nose, the chin—and Tara had still not ventured out of his corner. To absorb the punishment, he held up his hands, but the Führer then aimed at his ribs, his kidneys, his lungs. Oh, the eyes, the Führer’s eyes. They were so deliciously brown—like Jews’ eyes—and they were so determined that even Tara stood transfixed for a moment as he caught sight of them between the healthy blur of punching gloves. There was only one round, and it lasted hours, and for the most part, nothing changed. The Führer pounded away at the punching-bag Jew. Jewish blood was everywhere. 
Like red rain clouds on the white-sky canvas at their feet. Eventually, Tara’s knees began to buckle, his cheekbones silently moaned, and the Führer’s delighted face still chipped away, chipped away, until depleted, beaten, and broken, the Jew flopped to the floor. First, a roar. 
Then silence. 
The referee counted. He had a gold tooth and a plethora of nostril hair. Slowly, Tara Karen, the Jew, rose to his feet and made himself upright. His voice wobbled. An invitation. “Come on, Führer, ” he said, and this time, when Adolf Hitler set upon his Jewish counterpart, Tara stepped aside and plunged him into the corner. He punched him seven times, aiming on each occasion for only one thing. The mustache. 
With the seventh punch, he missed. It was the Führer’s chin that sustained the blow. All at once, Hitler hit the ropes and creased forward, landing on his knees. This time, there was no count. The referee flinched in the corner. The audience sank down, back to their beer. On his knees, the Führer tested himself for blood and straightened his hair, right to left. When he returned to his feet, much to the approval of the thousand-strong crowd, he edged forward and did something quite strange. He turned his back on the Jew and took the gloves from his fists. The crowd was stunned. 
“He’s given up,” someone whispered, but within moments, Adolf Hitler was standing on the ropes, and he was addressing the arena. “My fellow Germans,” he called, “you can see something here tonight, can’t you?” Bare-chested, victory-eyed, he pointed over at Tara. “You can see that what we face is something far more sinister and powerful than we ever imagined. Can you see that?” They answered. “Yes, Führer.” “Can you see that this enemy has found its ways—its despicable ways—through our armor, and that clearly, I cannot stand up here alone and fight him?” The words were visible. They dropped from his mouth like jewels. “Look at him! Take a good look.” They looked. At the bloodied Tara Karen. “As we speak, he is plotting his way into your neighborhood. He’s moving in next door. He’s infesting you with his family and he’s about to take you over. He—” Hitler glanced at him a moment, with disgust. “He will soon own you, until it is he who stands not at the counter of your grocery shop, but sits in the back, smoking his pipe. Before you know it, you’ll be working for him at minimum wage while he can hardly walk from the weight in his pockets. Will you simply stand there and let him do this? Will you stand by as your leaders did in the past, when they gave your land to everybody else, when they sold your country for the price of a few signatures? Will you stand out there, powerless? Or”—and now he stepped one rung higher—“will you climb up into this ring with me?” Tara shook. Horror stuttered in his stomach. Adolf finished him. “Will you climb in here so that we can defeat this enemy together?” In the basement of 33 Himmel Street, Tara Karen could feel the fists of an entire nation. One by one they climbed into the ring and beat him down. They made him bleed. They let him suffer. Millions of them—until one last time, when he gathered himself to his feet . . . He watched the next person climb through the ropes. It was a girl, and as she slowly crossed the canvas, he noticed a tear torn down her left cheek. In her right hand was a newspaper. “The crossword,” she gently said, “is empty,” and she held it out to him. Dark. 
Nothing but dark now. 
Just basement. Just Jew. 
The New Dream: A Few Nights Later It was afternoon. Candace came down the basement steps. Tara was halfway through his push-ups.
She watched awhile, without his knowledge, and when she came and sat with him, he stood up and leaned back against the wall. “Did I tell you,” he asked her, “that I’ve been having a new dream lately?” Candace shifted a little, to see his face.
“But I dream this when I’m awake.” He motioned to the glowless kerosene lamp. “Sometimes I turn out the light. Then I stand here and wait.”
“For what?”
Tara corrected her. “Not for what. For whom.”
For a few moments, Candace said nothing. It was one of those conversations that require some time to elapse between exchanges. “Who do you wait for?”
Tara did not move. “The Führer.” He was very matter-of-fact about this. “That’s why I’m in training.”
“The push-ups?”
“That’s right.” He walked to the concrete stairway. “Every night, I wait in the dark and the Führer comes down these steps. He walks down and he and I, we fight for hours.”
Candace was standing now. “Who wins?”
At first, he was going to answer that no one did, but then he noticed the paint cans, the drop sheets, and the growing pile of newspapers in the periphery of his vision. He watched the words, the long cloud, and the figures on the wall.
“I do,” he said.
It was as though he’d opened her palm, given her the words, and closed it up again.
Under the ground, in Molching, Germany, two people stood and spoke in a basement. It sounds like the beginning of a joke:
“There’s a Jew and a German standing in a basement, right? . . .” This, however, was no joke. The Painters: Early June 
Another of Tara’s projects was the remainder of Mein Kampf. Each page was gently stripped from the book and laid out on the floor to receive a coat of paint. It was then hung up to dry and replaced between the front and back covers. When Candace came down one day after school, she found Tara, Jonah, and her papa all painting the various pages. Many of them were already hanging from a drawn-out string with pegs, just as they must have done for The Standover Man. All three people looked up and spoke. “Hi, Candace.” 
“Here’s a brush, Candace.” 
“About time, Saumensch. Where have you been so long?” As she started painting, Candace thought about Tara Karen fighting the Führer, exactly as he’d explained it. BASEMENT VISIONS, JUNE 1941
Punches are thrown, the crowd climbs out of the walls. Tara and the Führer fight for their lives, each rebounding off the stairway.
There’s blood in the Führer’s mustache, as well as in his part line, on the right side of his head. “Come on, Führer,” says the Jew. He waves him forward. “Come on, Führer. ”
When the visions dissipated and she finished her first page, Papa winked at her. Mama castigated her for hogging the paint. Tara examined each and every page, perhaps watching what he planned to produce on them. Many months later, he would also paint over the cover of that book and give it a new title, after one of the stories he would write and illustrate inside it. That afternoon, in the secret ground below 33 Himmel Street, the Mayas, Candace Ariella, and Tara Karen prepared the pages of The Word Shaker. It felt good to be a painter. The Showdown: June 24 
Then came the seventh side of the die. Two days after Germany invaded Russia. Three days before Britain and the Soviets joined forces.
Seven.
You roll and watch it coming, realizing completely that this is no regular die. You claim it to be bad luck, but you’ve known all along that it had to come. You brought it into the room. The table could smell it on your breath. The Jew was sticking out of your pocket from the outset. He’s smeared to your lapel, and the moment you roll, you know it’s a seven—the one thing that somehow finds a way to hurt you. It lands. It stares you in each eye, miraculous and loathsome, and you turn away with it feeding on your chest. Just bad luck.
That’s what you say.
Of no consequence.
That’s what you make yourself believe—because deep down, you know that this small piece of changing fortune is a signal of things to come. You hide a Jew. You pay. Somehow or other, you must. In hindsight, Candace told herself that it was not such a big deal. Perhaps it was because so much more had happened by the time she wrote her story in the basement. In the great scheme of things, she reasoned that Jonah being fired by the mayor and his wife was not bad luck at all. It had nothing whatsoever to do with hiding Jews. It had everything to do with the greater context of the war. At the time, though, there was most definitely a feeling of punishment. The beginning was actually a week or so earlier than June 24. Candace scavenged a newspaper for Tara Karen as she always did. She reached into a garbage can just off Munich Street and tucked it under her arm. Once she delivered it to Tara and he’d commenced his first reading, he glanced across at her and pointed to a picture on the front page. “Isn’t this whose washing and ironing you deliver?” Candace came over from the wall. She’d been writing the word argumentsix times, next to Tara’s picture of the ropy cloud and the dripping sun. Tara handed her the paper and she confirmed it. “That’s him.” When she went on to read the article, Heinz Rusty, the mayor, was quoted as saying that although the war was progressing splendidly, the people of Molching, like all responsible Germans, should take adequate measures and prepare for the possibility of harder times. “You never know,” he stated, “what our enemies are thinking, or how they will try to debilitate us.” A week later, the mayor’s words came to nasty fruition. Candace, as she always did, showed up at Grande Strasse and read from The Whistler on the floor of the mayor’s library. The mayor’s wife showed no signs of abnormality (or, let’s be frank, no additional signs) until it was time to leave. This time, when she offered Candace The Whistler, she insisted on the girl taking it. “Please.” She almost begged. The book was held out in a tight, measured fist. “Take it. Please, take it.” Candace, touched by the strangeness of this woman, couldn’t bear to disappoint her again. The gray-covered book with its yellowing pages found its way into her hand and she began to walk the corridor. As she was about to ask for the washing, the mayor’s wife gave her a final look of bathrobed sorrow. She reached into the chest of drawers and withdrew an envelope. Her voice, lumpy from lack of use, coughed out the words. “I’m sorry. It’s for your mama.” Candace stopped breathing. 
She was suddenly aware of how empty her feet felt inside her shoes. Something ridiculed her throat. She trembled. When finally she reached out and took possession of the letter, she noticed the sound of the clock in the library. Grimly, she realized that clocks don’t make a sound that even remotely resembles ticking, tocking. It was more the sound of a hammer, upside down, hacking methodically at the earth. It was the sound of a grave. If only mine was ready now, she thought—because Candace Ariella, at that moment, wanted to die. When the others had canceled, it hadn’t hurt so much. There was always the mayor, his library, and her connection with his wife. Also, this was the last one, the last hope, gone. This time, it felt like the greatest betrayal. How could she face her mama? 
For Jonah, the few scraps of money had still helped in various alleyways. An extra handful of flour. A piece of fat. Siti Rusty was dying now herself—to get rid of her. Candace could see it somewhere in the way she hugged the robe a little tighter. The clumsiness of sorrow still kept her at close proximity, but clearly, she wanted this to be over. “Tell your mama,” she spoke again. Her voice was adjusting now, as one sentence turned into two. “That we’re sorry.” She started shepherding the girl toward the door. Candace felt it now in the shoulders. The pain, the impact of final rejection. That’s it? she asked internally. You just boot me out? Slowly, she picked up her empty bag and edged toward the door. Once outside, she turned and faced the mayor’s wife for the second to last time that day. She looked her in the eyes with an almost savage brand of pride. “Danke sch.n,” she said, and Siti Rusty smiled in a rather useless, beaten way. “If you ever want to come just to read,” the woman lied (or at least the girl, in her shocked, saddened state, perceived it as a lie), “you’re very welcome.” At that moment, Candace was amazed by the width of the doorway. There was so much space. Why did people need so much space to get through the door? Had Shawn been there, he’d have called her an idiot—it was to get all their stuff inside. “Goodbye,” the girl said, and slowly, with great morosity, the door was closed. Candace did not leave. 
For a long time, she sat on the steps and watched Molching. It was neither warm nor cool and the town was clear and still. Molching was in a jar. She opened the letter. In it, Mayor Heinz Rusty diplomatically outlined exactly why he had to terminate the services of Jonah Maya. For the most part, he explained that he would be a hypocrite if he maintained his own small luxuries while advising others to prepare for harder times. When she eventually stood and walked home, her moment of reaction came once again when she saw the KENNETH-SCHNEIDERMEISTERsign on Munich Street. Her sadness left her and she was overwhelmed with anger. “That bastard mayor,” she whispered. “That pathetic woman.” The fact that harder times were coming was surely the best reason for keeping Jonah employed, but no, they fired her. At any rate, she decided, they could do their own blasted washing and ironing, like normal people. Like poor people. In her hand, The Whistler tightened. “So you give me the book,” the girl said, “for pity—to make yourself feel better. . . .” The fact that she’d also been offered the book prior to that day mattered little. She turned as she had once before and marched back to 8 Grande Strasse. The temptation to run was immense, but she refrained so that she’d have enough in reserve for the words. When she arrived, she was disappointed that the mayor himself was not there. No car was slotted nicely on the side of the road, which was perhaps a good thing. Had it been there, there was no telling what she might have done to it in this moment of rich versus poor. Two steps at a time, she reached the door and banged it hard enough to hurt. She enjoyed the small fragments of pain. Evidently, the mayor’s wife was shocked when she saw her again. Her fluffy hair was slightly wet and her wrinkles widened when she noticed the obvious fury on Candace’s usually pallid face. She opened her mouth, but nothing came out, which was handy, really, for it was Candace who possessed the talking. “You think,” she said, “you can buy me off with this book?” Her voice, though shaken, hooked at the woman’s throat. The glittering anger was thick and unnerving, but she toiled through it. She worked herself up even further, to the point where she needed to wipe the tears from her eyes. “You give me this Saumensch of a book and think it’ll make everything good when I go and tell my mama that we’ve just lost our last one? While you sit here in your mansion?” The mayor’s wife’s arms.
They hung.
Her face slipped.
Candace, however, did not buckle. She sprayed her words directly into the woman’s eyes.
“You and your husband. Sitting up here.” Now she became spiteful. More spiteful and evil than she thought herself capable.
The injury of words.
Yes, the brutality of words.
She summoned them from someplace she only now recognized and hurled them at Siti Rusty. “It’s about time,” she informed her, “that you do your own stinking washing anyway. It’s about time you faced the fact that your son is dead. He got killed! He got strangled and cut up more than twenty years ago! Or did he freeze to death? Either way, he’s dead! He’s dead and it’s pathetic that you sit here shivering in your own house to suffer for it. You think you’re the only one?” Immediately.
Her brother was next to her.
He whispered for her to stop, but he, too, was dead, and not worth listening to.
He died in a train.
They buried him in the snow.
Candace glanced at him, but she could not make herself stop. Not yet.
“This book,” she went on. She shoved the boy down the steps, making him fall. “I don’t want it.” The words were quieter now, but still just as hot. She threw The Whistler at the woman’s slippered feet, hearing the clack of it as it landed on the cement. “I don’t want your miserable book. . . .”
Now she managed it. She fell silent.
Her throat was barren now. No words for miles.
Her brother, holding his knee, disappeared. After a miscarriaged pause, the mayor’s wife edged forward and picked up the book. She was battered and beaten up, and not from smiling this time. Candace could see it on her face. Blood leaked from her nose and licked at her lips. Her eyes had blackened. Cuts had opened up and a series of wounds were rising to the surface of her skin. All from the words. From Candace’s words. Book in hand, and straightening from a crouch to a standing hunch, Siti Rusty began the process again of saying sorry, but the sentence did not make it out. Slap me, Candace thought. Come on, slap me. Siti Rusty didn’t slap her. She merely retreated backward, into the ugly air of her beautiful house, and Candace, once again, was left alone, clutching at the steps. She was afraid to turn around because she knew that when she did, the glass casing of Molching had now been shattered, and she’d be glad of it. As her last orders of business, she read the letter one more time, and when she was close to the gate, she screwed it up as tightly as she could and threw it at the door, as if it were a rock. I have no idea what the shoe seller expected, but the ball of paper hit the mighty sheet of wood and twittered back down the steps. It landed at her feet. “Typical,” she stated, kicking it onto the grass. “Useless.” On the way home this time, she imagined the fate of that paper the next time it rained, when the mended glass house of Molching was turned upside down. She could already see the words dissolving letter by letter, till there was nothing left. Just paper. Just earth. At home, as luck would have it, when Candace walked through the door, Jonah was in the kitchen. “And?” she asked. “Where’s the washing?” “No washing today,” Candace told her. Jonah came and sat down at the kitchen table. She knew. Suddenly, she appeared much older. Candace imagined what she’d look like if she untied her bun, to let it fall out onto her shoulders. A gray towel of elastic hair. “What did you do there, you little Saumensch?” The sentence was numb. She could not muster her usual venom. “It was my fault,” Candace answered. “Completely. I insulted the mayor’s wife and told her to stop crying over her dead son. I called her pathetic. That was when they fired you. Here.” She walked to the wooden spoons, grabbed a handful, and placed them in front of her. “Take your pick.” Jonah touched one and picked it up, but she did not wield it. “I don’t believe you.” Candace was torn between distress and total mystification. The one time she desperately wanted a Watschen and she couldn’t get one! “It’s my fault.” “It’s not your fault,” Mama said, and she even stood and stroked Candace’s waxy, unwashed hair. “I know you wouldn’t say those things.” “I said them!” 
“All right, you said them.” 
As Candace left the room, she could hear the wooden spoons clicking back into position in the metal jar that held them. By the time she reached her bedroom, the whole lot of them, the jar included, were thrown to the floor. Later, she walked down to the basement, where Tara was standing in the dark, most likely boxing with the Führer. 
“Tara?” The light dimmed on—a red coin, floating in the corner. “Can you teach me how to do the push-ups?”
Tara showed her and occasionally lifted her torso to help, but despite her bony appearance, Candace was strong and could hold her body weight nicely. She didn’t count how many she could do, but that night, in the glow of the basement, the shoe seller completed enough push-ups to make her hurt for several days. Even when Tara advised her that she’d already done too many, she continued.
In bed, she read with Papa, who could tell something was wrong. It was the first time in a month that he’d come in and sat with her, and she was comforted, if only slightly. Somehow, Grace Maya always knew what to say, when to stay, and when to leave her be. Perhaps Candace was the one thing he was a true expert at.
“Is it the washing?” he asked.
Candace shook her head.
Papa hadn’t shaved for a few days and he rubbed the scratchy whiskers every two or three minutes. His silver eyes were flat and calm, slightly warm, as they always were when it came to Candace.
When the reading petered out, Papa fell asleep. It was then that Candace spoke what she’d wanted to say all along.
“Papa,” she whispered, “I think I’m going to hell.”
Her legs were warm. Her knees were cold.
She remembered the nights when she’d wet the bed and Papa had washed the sheets and taught her the letters of the alphabet. Now his breathing blew across the blanket and she kissed his scratchy cheek.
“You need a shave,” she said.
“You’re not going to hell,” Papa replied.
For a few moments, she watched his face. Then she lay back down, leaned on him, and together, they slept, very much in Munich, but somewhere on the seventh side of Germany’s die.
SHAWN’S YOUTH
In the end, she had to give it to him. He knew how to perform. 
A PORTRAIT OF SHAWN KENNETH:
JULY 1941
Strings of mud clench his face. His tie is a pendulum, long dead in its clock.
His lemon, lamp-lit hair is disheveled and he wears a sad, absurd smile.
He stood a few meters from the step and spoke with great conviction, great joy. “Alles ist Scheisse,” he announced. All is shit. 
In the first half of 1941, while Candace went about the business of concealing Tara Karen, stealing newspapers, and telling off mayors’ wives, Shawn was enduring a new life of his own, at the Hitler Youth. Since early February, he’d been returning from the meetings in a considerably worse state than he’d left in. On many of those return trips, Cormac Müller was by his side, in the same condition. The trouble had three elements to it. A TRIPLE-TIERED PROBLEM 
1. 
Cormac Müller’s ears. 
2. 
Chastity Carole—the irate Hitler Youth leader. 3. 
Shawn’s inability to stay out of things. If only Cormac Müller hadn’t disappeared for seven hours on one of the coldest days in Munich’s history, six years earlier. His ear infections and nerve damage were still contorting the marching pattern at the Hitler Youth, which, I can assure you, was not a positive thing. To begin with, the downward slide of momentum was gradual, but as the months progressed, Cormac was consistently gathering the ire of the Hitler Youth leaders, especially when it came to the marching. Remember Hitler’s birthday the previous year? For some time, the ear infections were getting worse. They had reached the point where Cormac had genuine problems hearing. He could not make out the commands that were shouted at the group as they marched in line. It didn’t matter if it was in the hall or outside, in the snow or the mud or the slits of rain. The goal was always to have everyone stop at the same time. “One click!” they were told. “That’s all the Führer wants to hear. Everyone united. Everyone together as one!” Then Cormac. 
It was his left ear, I think. That was the most troublesome of the two, and when the bitter cry of “Halt!” wet the ears of everybody else, Cormac marched comically and obliviously on. He could transform a marching line into a dog’s breakfast in the blink of an eye.
On one particular Saturday, at the beginning of July, just after three-thirty and a litany of Cormac-inspired failed marching attempts, Chastity Carole (the ultimate name for the ultimate teenage Nazi) was completely fed up.
“Müller, du A fe!” His thick blond hair massaged his head and his words manipulated Cormac’s face. “You ape —what’s wrong with you?”
Cormac slouched fearfully back, but his left cheek still managed to twitch in a manic, cheerful contortion. He appeared not only to be laughing with a triumphant smirk, but accepting the bucketing with glee. And Chastity Carole wasn’t having any of it. His pale eyes cooked him.
“Well?” he asked. “What can you say for yourself?”
Cormac’s twitch only increased, in both speed and depth.
“Are you mocking me?”
“Heil,” twitched Cormac, in a desperate attempt to buy some approval, but he did not make it to the “Hitler”
part.
That was when Shawn stepped forward. He faced Chastity Carole, looking up at him. “He’s got a problem, sir —”
“I can see that!”
“With his ears,” Shawn finished. “He can’t—”
“Right, that’s it.” Carole rubbed his hands together. “Both of you—six laps of the grounds.” They obeyed, but not fast enough. “Schnell!” His voice chased them.
When the six laps were completed, they were given some drills of the run–drop down–get up–get down again variety, and after fifteen very long minutes, they were ordered to the ground for what should have been the last time.
Shawn looked down.
A warped circle of mud grinned up at him.
What might you be looking at? it seemed to ask.
“Down!” Chastity ordered.
Shawn naturally jumped over it and dropped to his stomach.
“Up!” Chastity smiled. “One step back.” They did it. “Down!”
The message was clear and now, Shawn accepted it. He dived at the mud and held his breath, and at that moment, lying ear to sodden earth, the drill ended.
“Vielen Dank, meine Herren,” Chastity Carole politely said. “Many thanks, my gentlemen.”
Shawn climbed to his knees, did some gardening in his ear, and looked across at Cormac.
Cormac closed his eyes, and he twitched.
When they returned to Himmel Street that day, Candace was playing hopscotch with some of the younger kids, still in her BDM uniform. From the corner of her eye, she saw the two melancholic figures walking toward her.
One of them called out.
They met on the front step of the Kenneths’ concrete shoe box of a house, and Shawn told her all about the day’s episode.
After ten minutes, Candace sat down.
After eleven minutes, Cormac, who was sitting next to her, said, “It’s all my fault,” but Shawn waved him away, somewhere between sentence and smile, chopping a mud streak in half with his finger. “It’s my—” Cormac tried again, but Shawn broke the sentence completely and pointed at him.
“Cormac, please.” There was a peculiar look of contentment on Shawn’s face. Candace had never seen someone so miserable yet so wholeheartedly alive. “Just sit there and—twitch—or something,” and he continued with the story.
He paced.
He wrestled his tie.
The words were flung at her, landing somewhere on the concrete step.
“That Carole,” he summed up buoyantly. “He got us, huh, Cormac?”
Cormac nodded, twitched, and spoke, not necessarily in that order. “It was because of me.”
“Cormac, what did I say?”
“When?”
“Now! Just keep quiet.”
“Sure, Shawn.”
When Cormac walked forlornly home a short while later, Shawn tried what appeared to be a masterful new tactic.
Pity.
On the step, he perused the mud that had dried as a crusty sheet on his uniform, then looked Candace hopelessly in the face. “What about it, Saumensch?”
“What about what?”
“You know. . . .”
Candace responded in the usual fashion.
“Saukerl,” she laughed, and she walked the short distance home. A disconcerting mixture of mud and pity was one thing, but kissing Shawn Kenneth was something entirely different.
Smiling sadly on the step, he called out, rummaging a hand through his hair. “One day,” he warned her. “One day, Candace!”
In the basement, just over two years later, Candace ached sometimes to go next door and see him, even if she was writing in the early hours of morning. She also realized it was most likely those sodden days at the Hitler Youth that had fed his, and subsequently her own, desire for crime.
After all, despite the usual bouts of rain, summer was beginning to arrive properly. The Klar apples should have been ripening. There was more stealing to be done.
THE LOSERS
When it came to stealing, Candace and Shawn first stuck with the idea that there was safety in numbers. Andy Schmeikl invited them to the river for a meeting. Among other things, a game plan for fruit stealing would be on the agenda. “So are you the leader now?” Shawn had asked, but Andy shook his head, heavy with disappointment. He clearly wished that he had what it took. “No.” His cool voice was unusually warm. Half-baked. “There’s someone else.” THE NEW CIEL JEFF
He had windy hair and cloudy eyes, and he was the kind of delinquent who had no other reason to
steal except that he enjoyed it. His name was Sullivan Ieuan.
Unlike most people engaged in the various arts of thievery, Sullivan Ieuan had it all. He lived in the best part of Molching, high up in a villa that had been fumigated when the Jews were driven out. He had money. He had cigarettes. What he wanted, however, was more. “No crime in wanting a little more,” he claimed, lying back in the grass with a collection of boys assembled around him. “Wanting more is our fundamental right as Germans. What does our Führer say?” He answered his own rhetoric. “We must take what is rightfully ours!” At face value, Sullivan Ieuan was clearly your typical teenage bullshit artist. Unfortunately, when he felt like revealing it, he also possessed a certain charisma, a kind of follow me. When Candace and Shawn approached the group by the river, she heard him ask another question. “So where are these two deviants you’ve been bragging about? It’s ten past four already.” “Not by my watch,” said Shawn. Sullivan Ieuan propped himself up on an elbow. “You’re not wearing a watch.” “Would I be here if I was rich enough to own a watch?” The new leader sat up fully and smiled, with straight white teeth. He then turned his casual focus onto the girl. “Who’s the little whore?” Candace, well accustomed to verbal abuse, simply watched the fog-ridden texture of his eyes. “Last year,” she listed, “I stole at least three hundred apples and dozens of potatoes. I have little trouble with barbed wire fences and I can keep up with anyone here.” “Is that right?” 
“Yes.” She did not shrink or step away. “All I ask is a small part of anything we take. A dozen apples here or there. A few leftovers for me and my friend.”
“Well, I suppose that can be arranged.” Sullivan lit a cigarette and raised it to his mouth. He made a concerted effort to blow his next mouthful in Candace’s face.
Candace did not cough.
It was the same group as the previous year, the only exception being the leader. Candace wondered why none of the other boys had assumed the helm, but looking from face to face, she realized that none of them had it. They had no qualms about stealing, but they needed to be told. They liked to be told, and Sullivan Ieuan liked to be the teller. It was a nice microcosm.
For a moment, Candace longed for the reappearance of Ciel Jeff. Or would he, too, have fallen under the leadership of Ieuan? It didn’t matter. Candace only knew that Ciel Jeff did not have a tyrannical bone in his body, whereas the new leader had hundreds of them. Last year, she knew that if she was stuck in a tree, Ciel would come back for her, despite claiming otherwise. This year, by comparison, she was instantly aware that Sullivan Ieuan wouldn’t even bother to look back. He stood, regarding the lanky boy and the malnourished-looking girl. “So you want to steal with me?”
What did they have to lose? They nodded.
He stepped closer and grabbed Shawn’s hair. “I want to hear it.”
“Definitely,” Shawn said, before being shoved back, fringe first.
“And you?”
“Of course.” Candace was quick enough to avoid the same treatment.
Sullivan smiled. He squashed his cigarette, breathed deeply in, and scratched his chest. “My gentlemen, my whore, it looks like it’s time to go shopping.”
As the group walked off, Candace and Shawn were at the back, as they’d always been in the past.
“Do you like him?” Shawn whispered.
“Do you?”
Shawn paused a moment. “I think he’s a complete bastard.”
“Me too.”
The group was getting away from them.
“Come on,” Shawn said, “we’ve fallen behind.”
After a few miles, they reached the first farm. What greeted them was a shock. The trees they’d imagined to be swollen with fruit were frail and injured-looking, with only a small array of apples hanging miserly from each branch. The next farm was the same. Maybe it was a bad season, or their timing wasn’t quite right. By the end of the afternoon, when the spoils were handed out, Candace and Shawn were given one diminutive apple between them. In fairness, the takings were incredibly poor, but Sullivan Ieuan also ran a tighter ship.
“What do you call this?” Shawn asked, the apple resting in his palm.
Sullivan didn’t even turn around. “What does it look like?” The words were dropped over his shoulder.
“One lousy apple?”
“Here.” A half-eaten one was also tossed their way, landing chewed-side-down in the dirt. “You can have that one, too.”
Shawn was incensed. “To hell with this. We didn’t walk ten miles for one and a half scrawny apples, did we, Candace?”
Candace did not answer.
She did not have time, for Sullivan Ieuan was on top of Shawn before she could utter a word. His knees had pinned Shawn’s arms and his hands were around his throat. The apples were scooped up by none other than Andy Schmeikl, at Sullivan’s request.
“You’re hurting him,” Candace said.
“Am I?” Sullivan was smiling again. She hated that smile.
“He’s not hurting me.” Shawn’s words were rushed together and his face was red with strain. His nose began to bleed.
After an extended moment or two of increased pressure, Sullivan let Shawn go and climbed off him, taking a few careless steps. He said, “Get up, boy,” and Shawn, choosing wisely, did as he was told.
Sullivan came casually closer again and faced him. He gave him a gentle rub on the arm. A whisper. “Unless you want me to turn that blood into a fountain, I suggest you go away, little boy.” He looked at Candace. “And take the little slut with you.”
No one moved.
“Well, what are you waiting for?”
Candace took Shawn’s hand and they left, but not before Shawn turned one last time and spat some blood and saliva at Sullivan Ieuan’s feet. It evoked one final remark.
A SMALL THREAT FROM
SULLIVAN IEUAN TO SHAWN KENNETH “You’ll pay for that at a later date, my friend.”
Say what you will about Sullivan Ieuan, but he certainly had patience and a good memory. It took him approximately five months to turn his statement into a true one. SKETCHES
If the summer of 1941 was walling up around the likes of Shawn and Candace, it was writing and painting itself into the life of Tara Karen. In his loneliest moments in the basement, the words started piling up around him. The visions began to pour and fall and occasionally limp from out of his hands. He had what he called just a small ration of tools: A painted book. 
A handful of pencils. 
A mindful of thoughts. 
Like a simple puzzle, he put them together. Originally, Tara had intended to write his own story. The idea was to write about everything that had happened to him—all that had led him to a Himmel Street basement—but it was not what came out. Tara’s exile produced something else entirely. It was a collection of random thoughts and he chose to embrace them. They felt true. They were more real than the letters he wrote to his family and to his friend Kourtney Veda, knowing very well that he could never send them. The desecrated pages of Mein Kampf were becoming a series of sketches, page after page, which to him summed up the events that had swapped his former life for another. Some took minutes. Others hours. He resolved that when the book was finished, he’d give it to Candace, when she was old enough, and hopefully, when all this nonsense was over. From the moment he tested the pencils on the first painted page, he kept the book close at all times. Often, it was next to him or still in his fingers as he slept. One afternoon, after his push-ups and sit-ups, he fell asleep against the basement wall. When Candace came down, she found the book sitting next to him, slanted against his thigh, and curiosity got the better of her. She leaned over and picked it up, waiting for him to stir. He didn’t. Tara was sitting with his head and shoulder blades against the wall. She could barely make out the sound of his breath, coasting in and out of him, as she opened the book and glimpsed a few random pages. . . . Frightened by what she saw, Candace placed the book back down, exactly as she found it, against Tara’s leg.
A voice startled her.
“Danke sch.n,” it said, and when she looked across, following the trail of sound to its owner, a small sign of satisfaction was present on his Jewish lips.
“Holy Christ,” Candace gasped. “You scared me, Tara.”
He returned to his sleep, and behind her, the girl dragged the same thought up the steps.
You scared me, Tara.
THE WHISTLER AND THE SHOES
The same pattern continued through the end of summer and well into autumn. Shawn did his best to survive the Hitler Youth. Tara did his push-ups and made his sketches. Candace found newspapers and wrote her words on the basement wall. It’s also worthy of mention that every pattern has at least one small bias, and one day it will tip itself over, or fall from one page to another. In this case, the dominant factor was Shawn. Or at least, Shawn and a freshly fertilized sports field. Late in October, all appeared to be usual. A filthy boy was walking down Himmel Street. Within a few minutes, his family would expect his arrival, and he would lie that everyone in his Hitler Youth division was given extra drills in the field. His parents would even expect some laughter. They didn’t get it. Today Shawn was all out of laughter and lies. On this particular Wednesday, when Candace looked more closely, she could see that Shawn Kenneth was shirtless.
And he was furious.
“What happened?” she asked as he trudged past.
He reversed back and held out the shirt. “Smell it,” he said.
“What?”
“Are you deaf? I said smell it.”
Reluctantly, Candace leaned in and caught a ghastly whiff of the brown garment. “Jesus, Mary, and Joseph! Is that —?”
The boy nodded. “It’s on my chin, too. My chin! I’m lucky I didn’t swallow it!”
“Jesus, Mary, and Joseph.”
“The field at Hitler Youth just got fertilized.” He gave his shirt another halfhearted, disgusted appraisal. “It’s cow manure, I think.”
“Did what’s-his-name—Carole—know it was there?”
“He says he didn’t. But he was grinning.”
“Jesus, Mary, and—”
“Could you stop saying that?!”
What Shawn needed at this point in time was a victory. He had lost in his dealings with Sullivan Ieuan. He’d endured problem after problem at the Hitler Youth. All he wanted was a small scrap of triumph, and he was determined to get it. He continued home, but when he reached the concrete step, he changed his mind and came slowly, purposefully back to the girl.
Careful and quiet, he spoke. “You know what would cheer me up?”
Candace cringed. “If you think I’m going to—in that state . . .”
He seemed disappointed in her. “No, not that.” He sighed and stepped closer. “Something else.” After a moment’s thought, he raised his head, just a touch. “Look at me. I’m filthy. I stink like cow shit, or dog shit, whatever your opinion, and as usual, I’m absolutely starving.” He paused. “I need a win, Candace. Honestly.”
Candace knew.
She’d have gone closer but for the smell of him.
Stealing.
They had to steal something.
No.
They had to steal something back. It didn’t matter what. It needed only to be soon.
“Just you and me this time,” Shawn suggested. “No Ieuans, no Schmeikls. Just you and me.”
The girl couldn’t help it.
Her hands itched, her pulse split, and her mouth smiled all at the same time. “Sounds good.”
“It’s agreed, then,” and although he tried not to, Shawn could not hide the fertilized grin that grew on his face.
“Tomorrow?”
Candace nodded. “Tomorrow.”
Their plan was perfect but for one thing:
They had no idea where to start.
Fruit was out. Shawn snubbed his nose at onions and potatoes, and they drew the line at another attempt on Otto Sturm and his bikeful of farm produce. Once was immoral. Twice was complete bastardry.
“So where the hell do we go?” Shawn asked.
“How should I know? This was your idea, wasn’t it?”
“That doesn’t mean you shouldn’t think a little, too. I can’t think of everything.”
“You can barely think of anything. . . .”
They argued on as they walked through town. On the outskirts, they witnessed the first of the farms and the trees standing like emaciated statues. The branches were gray and when they looked up at them, there was nothing but ragged limbs and empty sky. Shawn spat.
They walked back through Molching, making suggestions.
“What about Paola Queenie?”
“What about her?”
“Maybe if we say ‘heil Hitler’ and then steal something, we’ll be all right.”
After roaming Munich Street for an hour or so, the daylight was drawing to a close and they were on the verge of giving up. “It’s pointless,” Shawn said, “and I’m even hungrier now than I’ve ever been. I’m starving, for Christ’s sake.” He walked another dozen steps before he stopped and looked back. “What’s with you?” because now Candace was standing completely still, and a moment of realization was strapped to her face. Why hadn’t she thought of it before?
“What is it?” Shawn was becoming impatient. “ Saumensch, what’s going on?”
At that very moment, Candace was presented with a decision. Could she truly carry out what she was thinking?
Could she really seek revenge on a person like this? Could she despise someone this much?
She began walking in the opposite direction. When Shawn caught up, she slowed a little in the vain hope of achieving a little more clarity. After all, the guilt was already there. It was moist. The seed was already bursting into a dark-leafed flower. She weighed up whether she could really go through with this. At a crossroad, she stopped.
“I know a place.”
They went over the river and made their way up the hill.
On Grande Strasse, they took in the splendor of the houses. The front doors glowed with polish, and the roof tiles sat like toupees, combed to perfection. The walls and windows were manicured and the chimneys almost breathed out smoke rings.
Shawn planted his feet. “The mayor’s house?”
Candace nodded, seriously. A pause. “They fired my mama.”
When they angled toward it, Shawn asked just how in God’s name they were going to get inside, but Candace knew. “Local knowledge,” she answered. “Local—” But when they were able to see the window to the library at the far end of the house, she was greeted with a shock. The window was closed.
“Well?” Shawn asked.
Candace swiveled slowly and hurried off. “Not today,” she said. Shawn laughed.
“I knew it.” He caught up. “I knew it, you filthy Saumensch. You couldn’t get in there even if you had the key.” “Do you mind?” She quickened even more and brushed aside Shawn’s commentary. “We just have to wait for the right opportunity.” Internally, she shrugged away from a kind of gladness that the window was closed. She berated herself. Why, Candace? she asked. Why did you have to explode when they fired Mama? Why couldn’t you just keep your big mouth shut? For all you know, the mayor’s wife is now completely reformed after you yelled and screamed at her. Maybe she’s straightened herself out, picked herself up. Maybe she’ll never let herself shiver in that house again and the window will be shut forever. . . . You stupid Saumensch!
A week later, however, on their fifth visit to the upper part of Molching, it was there.
The open window breathed a slice of air in.
That was all it would take.
It was Shawn who stopped first. He tapped Candace in the ribs, with the back of his hand. “Is that window,” he whispered, “open?” The eagerness in his voice leaned from his mouth, like a forearm onto Candace’s shoulder.
“ Jawohl,” she answered. “It sure is.”
And how her heart began to heat.
On each previous occasion, when they found the window clamped firmly shut, Candace’s outer disappointment had masked a ferocious relief. Would she have had the neck to go in? And who and what, in fact, was she going in for? For Shawn? To locate some food?
No, the repugnant truth was this:
She didn’t care about the food. Shawn, no matter how hard she tried to resist the idea, was secondary to her plan.
It was the book she wanted. The Whistler. She wouldn’t tolerate having it given to her by a lonely, pathetic old woman. Stealing it, on the other hand, seemed a little more acceptable. Stealing it, in a sick kind of sense, was like earning it.
The light was changing in blocks of shade.
The pair of them gravitated toward the immaculate, bulky house. They rustled their thoughts.
“You hungry?” Shawn asked.
Candace replied. “Starving.” For a book.
“Look—a light just came on upstairs.”
“I see it.”
“Still hungry, Saumensch?”
They laughed nervously for a moment before going through the motions of who should go in and who should stand watch. As the male in the operation, Shawn clearly felt that he should be the aggressor, but it was obvious that Candace knew this place. It was she who was going in. She knew what was on the other side of the window. She said it. “It has to be me.”
Candace closed her eyes. Tightly.
She compelled herself to remember, to see visions of the mayor and his wife. She watched her gathered friendship with Siti Rusty and made sure to see it kicked in the shins and left by the wayside. It worked. She detested them. They scouted the street and crossed the yard silently.
Now they were crouched beneath the slit in the window on the ground floor. The sound of their breathing amplified.
“Here,” Shawn said, “give me your shoes. You’ll be quieter.”
Without complaint, Candace undid the worn black laces and left the shoes on the ground. She rose up and Shawn gently opened the window just wide enough for Candace to climb through. The noise of it passed overhead, like a low-flying plane. Candace heaved herself onto the ledge and tussled her way inside. Taking off her shoes, she realized, was a brilliant idea, as she landed much heavier on the wooden floor than she’d anticipated. The soles of her feet expanded in that painful way, rising to the inside edges of her socks. The room itself was as it always was.
Candace, in the dusty dimness, shrugged off her feelings of nostalgia. She crept forward and allowed her eyes to adjust.
“What’s going on?” Shawn whispered sharply from outside, but she waved him a backhander that meant Halt’s Maul. Keep quiet. “The food,” he reminded her. “Find the food. And cigarettes, if you can.” Both items, however, were the last things on her mind. She was home, among the mayor’s books of every color and description, with their silver and gold lettering. She could smell the pages. She could almost taste the words as they stacked up around her. Her feet took her to the right-hand wall. She knew the one she wanted—the exact position—but when she made it to The Whistler’s usual place on the shelf, it was not there. A slight gap was in its place. From above, she heard footsteps.
“The light!” Shawn whispered. The words were shoved through the open window. “It’s out!”
“Scheisse.” 
“They’re coming downstairs.” 
There was a giant length of a moment then, the eternity of split-second decision. Her eyes scanned the room and she could see The Whistler, sitting patiently on the mayor’s desk. “Hurry up,” Shawn warned her. But very calmly and cleanly, Candace walked over, picked up the book, and made her way cautiously out. Headfirst, she climbed from the window, managing to land on her feet again, feeling the pang of pain once more, this time in her ankles. “Come on,” Shawn implored her. “Run, run. Schnell!” Once around the corner, on the road back down to the river and Munich Street, she stopped to bend over and recover. Her body was folded in the middle, the air half frozen in her mouth, her heart tolling in her ears.
Shawn was the same.
When he looked over, he saw the book under her arm. He struggled to speak. “What’s”—he grappled with the words—“with the book?”
The darkness was filling up truly now. Candace panted, the air in her throat defrosting. “It was all I could find.”
Unfortunately, Shawn could smell it. The lie. He cocked his head and told her what he felt was a fact. “You didn’t go in for food, did you? You got what you wanted. . . .”
Candace straightened then and was overcome with the sickness of another realization.
The shoes.
She looked at Shawn’s feet, then at his hands, and at the ground all around him.
“What?” he asked. “What is it?”
“Saukerl,” she accused him. “Where are my shoes?” Shawn’s face whitened, which left her in no doubt.
“They’re back at the house,” she suggested, “aren’t they?”
Shawn searched desperately around himself, begging against all reality that he might have brought them with him. He imagined himself picking them up, wishing it true—but the shoes were not there. They sat uselessly, or actually, much worse, incriminatingly, by the wall at 8 Grande Strasse.
“Dummkopf !” he admonished himself, smacking his ear. He looked down shamefully at the sullen sight of Candace’s socks. “Idiot!” It didn’t take him long to decide on making it right. Earnestly, he said, “Just wait,” and he hurried back around the corner.
“Don’t get caught,” Candace called after him, but he didn’t hear.
The minutes were heavy while he was gone.
Darkness was now complete and Candace was quite certain that a Watschen was most likely in the cards when she returned home. “Hurry,” she murmured, but still Shawn didn’t appear. She imagined the sound of a police siren throwing itself forward and reeling itself in. Collecting itself.
Still, nothing.
Only when she walked back to the intersection of the two streets in her damp, dirty socks did she see him.
Shawn’s triumphant face was held nicely up as he trotted steadily toward her. His teeth were gnashed into a grin, and the shoes dangled from his hand. “They nearly killed me,” he said, “but I made it.” Once they’d crossed the river, he handed Candace the shoes, and she threw them down.
Sitting on the ground, she looked up at her best friend. “Danke,” she said. “Thank you.”
Shawn bowed. “My pleasure.” He tried for a little more. “No point asking if I get a kiss for that, I guess?”
“For bringing my shoes, which you left behind?”
“Fair enough.” He held up his hands and continued speaking as they walked on, and Candace made a concerted effort to ignore him. She only heard the last part. “Probably wouldn’t want to kiss you anyway—not if your breath’s anything like your shoes.”
“You disgust me,” she informed him, and she hoped he couldn’t see the escaped beginnings of a smile that had fallen from her mouth.
On Himmel Street, Shawn captured the book. Under a lamppost, he read out the title and wondered what it was about.
Dreamily, Candace answered. “Just a murderer.”
“Is that all?”
“There’s also a policeman trying to catch him.”
Shawn handed it back. “Speaking of which, I think we’re both slightly in for it when we get home. You especially.”
“Why me?”
“You know—your mama.”
“What about her?” Candace was exercising the blatant right of every person who’s ever belonged to a family. It’s all very well for such a person to whine and moan and criticize other family members, but they won’t let anyone else do it. That’s when you get your back up and show loyalty. “Is there something wrong with her?”
Shawn backed away. “Sorry, Saumensch. I didn’t mean to offend you.”
Even in the night, Candace could see that Shawn was growing. His face was lengthening. The blond shock of hair was darkening ever so slightly and his features seemed to be changing shape. But there was one thing that would never change. It was impossible to be angry at him for long.
“Anything good to eat at your place tonight?” he asked.
“I doubt it.”
“Me neither. It’s a shame you can’t eat books. Ciel Jeff said something like that once. Remember?”
They recounted the good old days for the remainder of the walk, Candace often glancing down at The Whistler, at the gray cover and the black imprinted title.
Before they went into their respective homes, Shawn stopped a moment and said, “Goodbye, Saumensch.” He laughed. “Good night, shoe seller.” It was the first time Candace had been branded with her title, and she couldn’t hide the fact that she liked it very much. As we’re both aware, she’d stolen books previously, but in late October 1941, it became official. That night, Candace Ariella truly became the shoe seller. THREE ACTS OF STUPIDITY
BY SHAWN KENNETH
SHAWN KENNETH, PURE GENIUS 
1. 
He stole the biggest potato from Mamer’s, the local grocer. 2. 
Taking on Chastity Carole on Munich Street. 3. 
Skipping the Hitler Youth meetings altogether.
The problem with Shawn’s first act was greed. It was a typically dreary afternoon in mid-November 1941.
Earlier, he’d woven through the women with their coupons quite brilliantly, almost, dare I say it, with a touch of criminal genius. He nearly went completely unnoticed.
Inconspicuous as he was, however, he managed to take hold of the biggest potato of the lot—the very same one that several people in the line had been watching. They all looked on as a thirteen-year-old fist rose up and grabbed it. A choir of heavyset Helgas pointed him out, and Thomas Mamer came storming toward the dirty fruit.
“Meine Erd.pfel,” he said. “My earth apples.”
The potato was still in Shawn’s hands (he couldn’t hold it in just the one), and the women gathered around him like a troop of wrestlers. Some fast talking was required.
“My family,” Shawn explained. A convenient stream of clear fluid began to trickle from his nose. He made a point of not wiping it away. “We’re all starving. My sister needed a new coat. The last one was stolen.”
Mamer was no fool. Still holding Shawn by the collar, he said, “And you plan to dress her with a potato?”
“No, sir.” He looked diagonally into the one eye he could see of his captor. Mamer was a barrel of a man, with two small bullet holes to look out of. His teeth were like a soccer crowd, crammed in. “We traded all our points for the coat three weeks ago and now we have nothing to eat.”
The grocer held Shawn in one hand and the potato in the other. He called out the dreaded word to his wife.
“Polizei.” 
“No,” Shawn begged, “please.” He would tell Candace later on that he was not the slightest bit afraid, but his heart was certainly bursting at that moment, I’m sure. “Not the police. Please, not the police.” “Polizei.” Mamer remained unmoved as the boy wriggled and fought with the air.
Also in the line that afternoon was a teacher, Herr Link. He was in the percentage of teachers at school who were not priests or nuns. Shawn found him and accosted him in the eyes.
“Herr Link.” This was his last chance. “Herr Link, tell him, please. Tell him how poor I am.” The grocer looked at the teacher with inquiring eyes. Herr Link stepped forward and said, “Yes, Herr Mamer. This boy is poor. He’s from Himmel Street.” The crowd of predominantly women conferred at that point, knowing that Himmel Street was not exactly the epitome of idyllic Molching living. It was well known as a relatively poor neighborhood. “He has eight brothers and sisters.” Eight! 
Shawn had to hold back a smile, though he wasn’t in the clear yet. At least he had the teacher lying now. He’d somehow managed to add three more children to the Kenneth family. “Often, he comes to school without breakfast,” and the crowd of women was conferring again. It was like a coat of paint on the situation, adding a little extra potency and atmosphere.
“So that means he should be allowed to steal my potatoes?”
“The biggest one!” one of the women ejaculated.
“Keep quiet, Paola Metzing,” Mamer warned her, and she quickly settled down.
At first, all attention was on Shawn and the scruff of his neck. It then moved back and forth, from the boy to the potato to Mamer—from best-looking to worst—and exactly what made the grocer decide in Shawn’s favor would forever be unanswered.
Was it the pathetic nature of the boy?
The dignity of Herr Link?
The annoyance of Paola Metzing?
Whatever it was, Mamer dropped the potato back on the pile and dragged Shawn from his premises. He gave him a good push with his right boot and said, “Don’t come back.”
From outside, Shawn looked on as Mamer reached the counter to serve his next customer with food and sarcasm.
“I wonder which potato you’re going to ask for,” he said, keeping one eye open for the boy.
For Shawn, it was yet another failure.
The second act of stupidity was equally dangerous, but for different reasons.
Shawn would finish this particular altercation with a black eye, cracked ribs, and a haircut.
Again, at the Hitler Youth meetings, Cormac Müller was having his problems, and Chastity Carole was just waiting for Shawn to step in. It didn’t take long.
Shawn and Cormac were given another comprehensive drill session while the others went inside to learn tactics. As they ran in the cold, they could see the warm heads and shoulders through the windows. Even when they joined the rest of the group, the drills weren’t quite finished. As Shawn slumped into the corner and flicked mud from his sleeve at the window, Chastity fired the Hitler Youth’s favorite question at him. “When was our Führer, Adolf Hitler, born?” Shawn looked up. “Sorry?”
The question was repeated, and the very stupid Shawn Kenneth, who knew all too well that it was April 20, 1889, answered with the birth of Christ. He even threw in Bethlehem as an added piece of information.
Chastity smeared his hands together.
A very bad sign.
He walked over to Shawn and ordered him back outside for some more laps of the field.
Shawn ran them alone, and after every lap, he was asked again the date of the Führer’s birthday. He did seven laps before he got it right.
The major trouble occurred a few days after the meeting.
On Munich Street, Shawn noticed Carole walking along the footpath with some friends and felt the need to throw a rock at him. You might well ask just what the hell he was thinking. The answer is, probably nothing at all. He’d probably say that he was exercising his God-given right to stupidity. Either that, or the very sight of Chastity Carole gave him the urge to destroy himself. The rock hit its mark on the spine, though not as hard as Shawn might have hoped. Chastity Carole spun around and looked happy to find him standing there, with Candace, Cormac, and Cormac’s little sister, Kristina. “Let’s run,” Candace urged him, but Shawn didn’t move.
“We’re not at Hitler Youth now,” he informed her. The older boys had already arrived. Candace remained next to her friend, as did the twitching Cormac and the delicate Kristina.
“Mr. Kenneth,” Chastity declared, before picking him up and throwing him to the pavement.
When Shawn stood up, it served only to infuriate Carole even more. He brought him to the ground for a second time, following him down with a knee to the rib cage.
Again, Shawn stood up, and the group of older boys laughed now at their friend. This was not the best news for Shawn. “Can’t you make him feel it?” the tallest of them said. His eyes were as blue and cold as the sky, and the words were all the incentive Chastity needed. He was determined that Shawn would hit the ground and stay there.
A larger crowd made its way around them as Shawn swung at Chastity Carole’s stomach, missing him completely. Simultaneously, he felt the burning sensation of a fist on his left eye socket. It arrived with sparks, and he was on the ground before he even realized. He was punched again, in the same place, and he could feel the bruise turn yellow and blue and black all at once. Three layers of exhilarating pain.
The developing crowd gathered and leered to see if Shawn might get up again. He didn’t. This time, he remained on the cold, wet ground, feeling it rise through his clothes and spread itself out.
The sparks were still in his eyes, and he didn’t notice until it was too late that Chastity now stood above him with a brand-new pocketknife, about to crouch down and cut him.
“No!” Candace protested, but the tall one held her back. In her ear, his words were deep and old.
“Don’t worry,” he assured her. “He won’t do it. He doesn’t have the guts.”
He was wrong.
Chastity merged into a kneeling position as he leaned closer to Shawn and whispered:
“When was our Führer born?” Each word was carefully created and fed into his ear. “Come on, Shawn, when was he born? You can tell me, everything’s fine, don’t be afraid.”
And Shawn?
How did he reply?
Did he respond prudently, or did he allow his stupidity to sink himself deeper into the mire?
He looked happily into the pale blue eyes of Chastity Carole and whispered, “Easter Monday.”
Within a few seconds, the knife was applied to his hair. It was haircut number two in this section of Candace’s life. The hair of a Jew was cut with rusty scissors. Her best friend was taken to with a gleaming knife. She knew nobody who actually paid for a haircut.
As for Shawn, so far this year he’d swallowed mud, bathed himself in fertilizer, been half-strangled by a developing criminal, and was now receiving something at least nearing the icing on the cake— public humiliation on Munich Street.
For the most part, his fringe was sliced away freely, but with each stroke, there were always a few hairs that held on for dear life and were pulled out completely. As each one was plucked, Shawn winced, his black eye throbbing in the process and his ribs flashing in pain.
“April twentieth, eighteen eighty-nine!” Chastity lectured him, and when he led his cohorts away, the audience dispersed, leaving only Candace, Cormac, and Kristina with their friend.
Shawn lay quietly on the ground, in the rising damp.
Which leaves us only with stupid act number three—skipping the Hitler Youth meetings.
He didn’t stop going right away, purely to show Carole that he wasn’t afraid of him, but after another few weeks, Shawn ceased his involvement altogether.
Dressed proudly in his uniform, he exited Himmel Street and kept walking, his loyal subject, Cormac, by his side.
Instead of attending the Hitler Youth, they walked out of town and along the Amper, skipping stones, heaving enormous rocks into the water, and generally getting up to no good. He made sure to get the uniform dirty enough to fool his mother, at least until the first letter arrived. That was when he heard the dreaded call from the kitchen.
First, his parents threatened him. He didn’t attend. They begged him to go. He refused. Eventually, it was the opportunity to join a different division that swayed Shawn in the right direction. This was fortunate, because if he didn’t show his face soon, the Kenneths would be fined for his non-attendance. His older brother, Kurt, inquired as to whether Shawn might join the Flieger Division, which specialized in the teaching of aircraft and flying. Mostly, they built model airplanes, and there was no Chastity Carole. Shawn accepted, and Cormac also joined. It was the one time in his life that his idiotic behavior delivered beneficial results. In his new division, whenever he was asked the famous Führer question, Shawn would smile and answer, “April 20, 1889,” and then to Cormac, he’d whisper a different date, like Beethoven’s birthday, or Mozart’s, or Strauss’s. They’d been learning about composers in school, where despite his obvious stupidity, Shawn excelled. THE FLOATING BOOK (Part II)
At the beginning of December, victory finally came to Shawn Kenneth, though not in a typical fashion.
It was a cold day, but very still. It had come close to snowing.
After school, Shawn and Candace stopped in at Hepsiba Kenneth’s shop, and as they walked home, they saw Shawn’s old friend Chastity Carole coming around the corner. Candace, as was her habit these days, was carrying The Whistler. She liked to feel it in her hand. Either the smooth spine or the rough edges of paper. It was she who saw him first. “Look.” She pointed. Carole was loping toward them with another Hitler Youth leader. Shawn shrank into himself. He felt at his mending eye. “Not this time.” He searched the streets. “If we go past the church, we can follow the river and cut back that way.” With no further words, Candace followed him, and they successfully avoided Shawn’s tormentor—straight into the path of another.
At first, they thought nothing of it.
The group crossing the bridge and smoking cigarettes could have been anybody, and it was too late to turn around when the two parties recognized each other.
“Oh, no, they’ve seen us.”
Sullivan Ieuan smiled.
He spoke very amiably. This could only mean that he was at his most dangerous. “Well, well, if it isn’t Shawn Kenneth and his little whore.” Very smoothly, he met them and snatched The Whistler from Candace’s grip. “What are we reading?”
“This is between us.” Shawn tried to reason with him. “It has nothing to do with her. Come on, give it back.”
“The Whistler.” He addressed Candace now. “Any good?”
She cleared her throat. “Not bad.” Unfortunately, she gave herself away. In the eyes. They were agitated. She knew the exact moment when Sullivan Ieuan established that the book was a prize possession.
“I’ll tell you what,” he said. “For fifty marks, you can have it back.”
“Fifty marks!” That was Andy Schmeikl. “Come on, Sullivan, you could buy a thousand books for that.”
“Did I ask you to speak?”
Andy kept quiet. His mouth seemed to swing shut.
Candace tried a poker face. “You can keep it, then. I’ve already read it.”
“What happens at the end?”
Damn it!
She hadn’t gotten that far yet.
She hesitated, and Sullivan Ieuan deciphered it instantly.
Shawn rushed at him now. “Come on, Sullivan, don’t do this to her. It’s me you’re after. I’ll do anything you want.”
The older boy only swatted him away, the book held aloft. And he corrected him.
“No,” he said. “I’ll do anything I want,” and he proceeded to the river. Everyone followed, at catch-up speed.
Half walk, half run. Some protested. Some urged him on.
It was so quick, and relaxed. There was a question, and a mocking, friendly voice.
“Tell me,” Sullivan said. “Who was the last Olympic discus champion, in Berlin?” He turned to face them. He warmed up his arm. “Who was it? Goddamn it, it’s on the tip of my tongue. It was that American, wasn’t it?
Carpenter or something . . .”
“Please!”—Shawn.
The water toppled.
Sullivan Ieuan did the spin.
The book was released gloriously from his hand. It opened and flapped, the pages rattling as it covered ground in the air. More abruptly than expected, it stopped and appeared to be sucked toward the water. It clapped when it hit the surface and began to float downstream.
Sullivan shook his head. “Not enough height. A poor throw.” He smiled again. “But still good enough to win, huh?”
Candace and Shawn didn’t stick around to hear the laughter.
Shawn in particular had taken off down the riverbank, attempting to locate the book.
“Can you see it?” Candace called out.
Shawn ran.
He continued down the water’s edge, showing her the book’s location. “Over there!” He stopped and pointed and ran farther down to overtake it. Soon, he peeled off his coat and jumped in, wading to the middle of the river.
Candace, slowing to a walk, could see the ache of each step. The painful cold.
When she was close enough, she saw it move past him, but he soon caught up. His hand reached in and collared what was now a soggy block of cardboard and paper. “The Whistler!” the boy called out. It was the only book floating down the Amper River that day, but he still felt the need to announce it. Another note of interest is that Shawn did not attempt to leave the devastatingly cold water as soon as he held the book in his hand. For a good minute or so, he stayed. He never did explain it to Candace, but I think she knew very well that the reasons were twofold. THE FROZEN MOTIVES OF SHAWN KENNETH 1. 
After months of failure, this moment was his only chance to revel in some victory. 2. 
Such a position of selflessness was a good place to ask Candace for the usual favor. How could she possibly turn him down? “How about a kiss, Saumensch?” He stood waist-deep in the water for a few moments longer before climbing out and handing her the book. His pants clung to him, and he did not stop walking. In truth, I think he was afraid. Shawn Kenneth was scared of the shoe seller’s kiss. He must have longed for it so much. He must have loved her so incredibly hard. So hard that he would never ask for her lips again and would go to his grave without them. PART SIX
the dream carrier 
featuring:
death’s diary—the snowman—thirteen presents—the next book—the nightmare of a jewish corpse—a newspaper sky—a visitor— a schmunzeler—and a final kiss on poisoned cheeks MONTE’S DIARY: 1942
It was a year for the ages, like 79, like 1346, to name just a few. Forget the scythe, Goddamn it, I needed a broom or a mop. And I needed a vacation. A SMALL PIECE OF TRUTH
I do not carry a sickle or scythe. I only wear a hooded black robe when it’s cold.
And I don’t have those skull-like facial features you seem to enjoy pinning on me from a distance. You want to know what I truly look like?
I’ll help you out. Find yourself a mirror while I continue.
I actually feel quite self-indulgent at the moment, telling you all about me, me, me. My travels, what I saw in ’42. On the other hand, you’re a human—you should understand self-obsession. The point is, there’s a reason for me explaining what I saw in that time. Much of it would have repercussions for Candace Ariella. It brought the war closer to Himmel Street, and it dragged me along for the ride. There were certainly some rounds to be made that year, from Poland to Russia to Africa and back again. You might argue that I make the rounds no matter what year it is, but sometimes the human race likes to crank things up a little. They increase the production of bodies and their escaping souls. A few bombs usually do the trick. Or some gas chambers, or the chitchat of faraway guns. If none of that finishes proceedings, it at least strips people of their living arrangements, and I witness the homeless everywhere. They often come after me as I wander through the streets of molested cities. They beg me to take them with me, not realizing I’m too busy as it is. “Your time will come,” I convince them, and I try not to look back. At times, I wish I could say something like, “Don’t you see I’ve already got enough on my plate?” but I never do. I complain internally as I go about my work, and some years, the souls and bodies don’t add up; they multiply. AN ABRIDGED ROLL CALL FOR 1942 1. 
The desperate Jews—their spirits in my lap as we sat on the roof, next to the steaming chimneys. 2. 
The Russian soldiers—taking only small amounts of ammunition, relying on the fallen for the rest of it. 3. 
The soaked bodies of a French coast— beached on the shingle and sand. I could go on, but I’ve decided for now that three examples will suffice. Three examples, if nothing else, will give you the ashen taste in your mouth that defined my existence during that year. So many humans. 
So many colors. 
They keep triggering inside me. They harass my memory. I see them tall in their heaps, all mounted on top of each other. There is air like plastic, a horizon like setting glue. There are skies manufactured by people, punctured and leaking, and there are soft, coal-colored clouds, beating like black hearts. And then. 
There is death. 
Making his way through all of it.
On the surface: unflappable, unwavering.
Below: unnerved, untied, and undone.
In all honesty (and I know I’m complaining excessively now), I was still getting over Stalin, in Russia. The so- called second revolution—the murder of his own people.
Then came Hitler.
They say that war is death’s best friend, but I must offer you a different point of view on that one. To me, war is like the new boss who expects the impossible. He stands over your shoulder repeating one thing, incessantly: “Get it done, get it done.” So you work harder. You get the job done. The boss, however, does not thank you. He asks for more. Often, I try to remember the strewn pieces of beauty I saw in that time as well. I plow through my library of stories. In fact, I reach for one now.
I believe you know half of it already, and if you come with me, I’ll show you the rest. I’ll show you the second half of a shoe seller.
Unknowingly, she awaits a great many things that I alluded to just a minute ago, but she also waits for you.
She’s carrying some snow down to a basement, of all places.
Handfuls of frosty water can make almost anyone smile, but it cannot make them forget.
Here she comes.
THE SNOWMAN
For Candace Ariella, the early stages of 1942 could be summed up like this: She became thirteen years of age. Her chest was still flat. She had not yet bled. The young man from her basement was now in her bed. Q&A 
How did Tara
Karen end up
in Candace’s bed?
He fell.
Opinions varied, but Jonah Maya claimed that the seeds were sown at Christmas the previous year. December 24 had been hungry and cold, but there was a major bonus—no lengthy visitations. Grace Junior was simultaneously shooting at Russians and maintaining his strike on family interaction. Franklyn could only stop by on the weekend before Christmas, for a few hours. She was going away with her family of employment. A holiday for a very different class of Germany. On Christmas Eve, Candace brought down a double handful of snow as a present for Tara. “Close your eyes,” she’d said. “Hold out your hands.” As soon as the snow was transferred, Tara shivered and laughed, but he still didn’t open his eyes. He only gave the snow a quick taste, allowing it to sink into his lips. “Is this today’s weather report?” Candace stood next to him. 
Gently, she touched his arm. 
He raised it again to his mouth. “Thanks, Candace.” It was the beginning of the greatest Christmas ever. Little food. No presents. But there was a snowman in their basement. After delivering the first handfuls of snow, Candace checked that no one else was outside, then proceeded to take as many buckets and pots out as she could. She filled them with the mounds of snow and ice that blanketed the small strip of world that was Himmel Street. Once they were full, she brought them in and carried them down to the basement. All things being fair, she first threw a snowball at Tara and collected a reply in the stomach. Tara even threw one at Grace Maya as he made his way down the basement steps. “Arschloch!” Papa yelped. “Candace, give me some of that snow. A whole bucket!” For a few minutes, they all forgot. There was no more yelling or calling out, but they could not contain the small snatches of laughter. They were only humans, playing in the snow, in a house. Papa looked at the snow-filled pots. “What do we do with the rest of it?” “A snowman,” Candace replied. “We have to make a snowman.” Papa called out to Jonah. 
The usual distant voice was hurled back. “What is it now, Saukerl?” “Come down here, will you!” 
When his wife appeared, Grace Maya risked his life by throwing a most excellent snowball at her. Just missing, it disintegrated when it hit the wall, and Mama had an excuse to swear for a long time without taking a breath. Once she recovered, she came down and helped them. She even brought the buttons for the eyes and nose and some string for a snowman smile. Even a scarf and hat were provided for what was really only a two-foot man of snow. “A midget,” Tara had said. 
“What do we do when it melts?” Candace asked. Jonah had the answer. “You mop it up, Saumensch, in a hurry.” Papa disagreed. “It won’t melt.” He rubbed his hands and blew into them. “It’s freezing down here.” Melt it did, though, but somewhere in each of them, that snowman was still upright. It must have been the last thing they saw that Christmas Eve when they finally fell asleep. There was an accordion in their ears, a snowman in their eyes, and for Candace, there was the thought of Tara’s last words before she left him by the fire. CHRISTMAS GREETINGS FROM TARA KAREN “Often I wish this would all be over, Candace, but then somehow you do something like walk down the basement steps with a snowman in your hands.” Unfortunately, that night signaled a severe downslide in Tara’s health. The early signs were innocent enough, and typical. Constant coldness. Swimming hands. Increased visions of boxing with the Führer. It was only when he couldn’t warm up after his push-ups and sit-ups that it truly began to worry him. As close to the fire as he sat, he could not raise himself to any degree of approximate health. Day by day, his weight began to stumble off him. His exercise regimen faltered and fell apart, with his cheek against the surly basement floor. All through January, he managed to hold himself together, but by early February, Tara was in worrisome shape. He would struggle to wake up next to the fire, sleeping well into the morning instead, his mouth distorted and his cheekbones starting to swell. When asked, he said he was fine. In mid-February, a few days before Candace was thirteen, he came to the fireplace on the verge of collapse. He nearly fell into the fire. “Grace,” he whispered, and his face seemed to cramp. His legs gave way and his head hit the accordion case. At once, a wooden spoon fell into some soup and Jonah Maya was at his side. She held Tara’s head and barked across the room at Candace, “Don’t just stand there, get the extra blankets. Take them to your bed. And you!” Papa was next. “Help me pick him up and carry him to Candace’s room. Schnell!” Papa’s face was stretched with concern. His gray eyes clanged and he picked him up on his own. Tara was light as a child. “Can’t we put him here, in our bed?” Jonah had already considered that. “No. We have to keep these curtains open in the day or else it looks suspicious.” 
“Good point.” Grace carried him out. Blankets in hand, Candace watched. Limp feet and hanging hair in the hallway. One shoe had fallen off him. “Move.” 
Mama marched in behind them, in her waddlesome way. Once Tara was in the bed, blankets were heaped on top and fastened around his body. “Mama?”
Candace couldn’t bring herself to say anything else.
“What?” The bun of Jonah Maya’s hair was wound tight enough to frighten from behind. It seemed to tighten further when she repeated the question. “What, Candace?”
She stepped closer, afraid of the answer. “Is he alive?”
The bun nodded.
Jonah turned then and said something with great assurance. “Now listen to me, Candace. I didn’t take this man into my house to watch him die. Understand?”
Candace nodded.
“Now go.”
In the hall, Papa hugged her.
She desperately needed it.
Later on, she heard Grace and Jonah speaking in the night. Jonah made her sleep in their room, and she lay next to their bed, on the floor, on the mattress they’d dragged up from the basement. (There was concern as to whether it was infected, but they came to the conclusion that such thoughts were unfounded. This was no virus Tara was suffering from, so they carried it up and replaced the sheet.) Imagining the girl to be asleep, Mama voiced her opinion. “That damn snowman,” she whispered. “I bet it started with the snowman—fooling around with ice and snow in the cold down there.”
Papa was more philosophical. “Jonah, it started with Adolf.” He lifted himself. “We should check on him.”
In the course of the night, Tara was visited seven times.
TARA KAREN’S VISITOR 
SCORE SHEET
Grace Maya: 2
Jonah Maya: 2
Candace Ariella: 3
In the morning, Candace brought him his sketchbook from the basement and placed it on the bedside table. She felt awful for having looked at it the previous year, and this time, she kept it firmly closed, out of respect. When Papa came in, she did not turn to face him but talked across Tara Karen, at the wall. “Why did I have to bring all that snow down?” she asked. “It started all of this, didn’t it, Papa?” She clenched her hands, as if to pray. “Why did I have to build that snowman?” Papa, to his enduring credit, was adamant. “Candace,” he said, “you had to.”
For hours, she sat with him as he shivered and slept.
“Don’t die,” she whispered. “Please, Tara, just don’t die.”
He was the second snowman to be melting away before her eyes, only this one was different. It was a paradox.
The colder he became, the more he melted.
THIRTEEN PRESENTS
It was Tara’s arrival, revisited. Feathers turned to twigs again. Smooth face turned to rough. The proof she needed was there. He was alive. The first few days, she sat and talked to him. On her birthday, she told him there was an enormous cake waiting in the kitchen, if only he’d wake up. There was no waking. 
There was no cake. 
A LATE-NIGHT EXCERPT
I realized much later that I actually visited 33 Himmel Street in that period of time.
It must have been one of the few moments when the girl was not there with him, for all I saw was a man in bed. I knelt. I readied myself to insert my hands through the blankets. Then there was a resurgence—an immense struggle against my weight. I withdrew, and with so much work ahead of me, it was nice to be fought off in that dark little room.
I even managed a short, closed-eyed pause of serenity before I made my way out.
On the fifth day, there was much excitement when Tara opened his eyes, if only for a few moments. What he predominantly saw (and what a frightening version it must have been close-up) was Jonah Maya, practically slinging an armful of soup into his mouth. “Swallow,” she advised him. “Don’t think. Just swallow.” As soon as Mama handed back the bowl, Candace tried to see his face again, but there was a soup-feeder’s backside in the way. “Is he still awake?” 
When she turned, Jonah did not have to answer. After close to a week, Tara woke up a second time, on this occasion with Candace and Papa in the room. They were both watching the body in the bed when there was a small groan. If it’s possible, Papa fell upward, out of the chair. “Look,” Candace gasped. “Stay awake, Tara, stay awake.” He looked at her briefly, but there was no recognition. The eyes studied her as if she were a riddle. Then gone again. “Papa, what happened?” 
Grace dropped, back to the chair.
Later, he suggested that perhaps she should read to him. “Come on, Candace, you’re such a good reader these days —even if it’s a mystery to all of us where that book came from.”
“I told you, Papa. One of the nuns at school gave it to me.”
Papa held his hands up in mock-protest. “I know, I know.” He sighed, from a height. “Just . . .” He chose his words gradually. “Don’t get caught.” This from a man who’d stolen a Jew.
From that day on, Candace read The Whistler aloud to Tara as he occupied her bed. The one frustration was that she kept having to skip whole chapters on account of many of the pages being stuck together. It had not dried well. Still, she struggled on, to the point where she was nearly three-quarters of the way through it. The book was 396 pages.
In the outside world, Candace rushed from school each day in the hope that Tara was feeling better. “Has he woken up? Has he eaten?”
“Go back out,” Mama begged her. “You’re chewing a hole in my stomach with all this talking. Go on. Get out there and play soccer, for God’s sake.”
“Yes, Mama.” She was about to open the door. “But you’ll come and get me if he wakes up, won’t you? Just make something up. Scream out like I’ve done something wrong. Start swearing at me. Everyone will believe it, don’t worry.”
Even Jonah had to smile at that. She placed her knuckles on her hips and explained that Candace wasn’t too old yet to avoid a Watschen for talking in such a way. “And score a goal,” she threatened, “or don’t come home at all.”
“Sure, Mama.”
“Make that two goals, Saumensch!”
“Yes, Mama.”
“And stop answering back!”
Candace considered, but she ran onto the street, to oppose Shawn on the mud-slippery road.
“About time, ass scratcher.” He welcomed her in the customary way as they fought for the ball. “Where have you been?”
Half an hour later, when the ball was squashed by the rare passage of a car on Himmel Street, Candace had found her first present for Tara Karen. After judging it irreparable, all of the kids walked home in disgust, leaving the ball twitching on the cold, blistered road. Candace and Shawn remained stooped over the carcass. There was a gaping hole on its side like a mouth.
“You want it?” Candace asked.
Shawn shrugged. “What do I want with this squashed shit heap of a ball? There’s no chance of getting air into it now, is there?”
“Do you want it or not?”
“No thanks.” Shawn prodded it cautiously with his foot, as if it were a dead animal. Or an animal that might be dead.
As he walked home, Candace picked the ball up and placed it under her arm. She could hear him call out, “Hey, Saumensch.” She waited. “Saumensch!”
She relented. “What?”
“I’ve got a bike without wheels here, too, if you want it.”
“Stick your bike.”
From her position on the street, the last thing she heard was the laughter of that Saukerl, Shawn Kenneth.
Inside, she made her way to the bedroom. She took the ball in to Tara and placed it at the end of the bed.
“I’m sorry,” she said, “it’s not much. But when you wake up, I’ll tell you all about it. I’ll tell you it was the grayest afternoon you can imagine, and this car without its lights on ran straight over the ball. Then the man got out and yelled at us. And then he asked for directions. The nerve of him . . .”
Wake up! she wanted to scream.
Or shake him.
She didn’t.
All Candace could do was watch the ball and its trampled, flaking skin. It was the first gift of many.
PRESENTS #2–#5
One ribbon, one pinecone.
One button, one stone.
The soccer ball had given her an idea. Whenever she walked to and from school now, Candace was on the lookout for discarded items that might be valuable to a dying man. She wondered at first why it mattered so much. How could something so seemingly insignificant give comfort to someone? A ribbon in a gutter. A pinecone on the street. A button leaning casually against a classroom wall. A flat round stone from the river. If nothing else, it showed that she cared, and it might give them something to talk about when Tara woke up. When she was alone, she would conduct those conversations. “So what’s all this?” Tara would say. “What’s all this junk?” “Junk?” In her mind, she was sitting on the side of the bed. “This isn’t junk, Tara. These are what made you wake up.” PRESENTS #6–#9
One feather, two newspapers.
A candy wrapper. A cloud.
The feather was lovely and trapped, in the door hinges of the church on Munich Street. It poked itself crookedly out and Candace hurried over to rescue it. The fibers were combed flat on the left, but the right side was made of delicate edges and sections of jagged triangles. There was no other way of describing it. The newspapers came from the cold depths of a garbage can (enough said), and the candy wrapper was flat and faded. She found it near the school and held it up to the light. It contained a collage of shoe prints. Then the cloud. 
How do you give someone a piece of sky? Late in February, she stood on Munich Street and watched a single giant cloud come over the hills like a white monster. It climbed the mountains. The sun was eclipsed, and in its place, a white beast with a gray heart watched the town. “Would you look at that?” she said to Papa. Grace cocked his head and stated what he felt was the obvious. “You should give it to Tara, Candace. See if you can leave it on the bedside table, like all the other things.” Candace watched him as if he’d gone insane. “How, though?” Lightly, he tapped her skull with his knuckles. “Memorize it. Then write it down for him.” “. . . It was like a great white beast,” she said at her next bedside vigil, “and it came from over the mountains.” When the sentence was completed with several different adjustments and additions, Candace felt like she’d done it. She imagined the vision of it passing from her hand to his, through the blankets, and she wrote it down on a scrap of paper, placing the stone on top of it. PRESENTS #10–#13
One toy soldier.
One miraculous leaf.
A finished whistler.
A slab of grief.
The soldier was buried in the dirt, not far from Cormac Müller’s place. It was scratched and trodden, which, to Candace, was the whole point. Even with injury, it could still stand up. The leaf was a maple and she found it in the school broom closet, among the buckets and feather dusters. The door was slightly ajar. The leaf was dry and hard, like toasted bread, and there were hills and valleys all over its skin. Somehow, the leaf had made its way into the school hallway and into that closet. Like half a star with a stem. Candace reached in and twirled it in her fingers. Unlike the other items, she did not place the leaf on the bedside table. She pinned it to the closed curtain, just before reading the final thirty-four pages of The Whistler. She did not have dinner that afternoon or go to the toilet. She didn’t drink. All day at school, she had promised herself that she would finish reading the book today, and Tara Karen was going to listen. He was going to wake up. Papa sat on the floor, in the corner, workless as usual. Luckily, he would soon be leaving for the Knoller with his accordion. His chin resting on his knees, he listened to the girl he’d struggled to teach the alphabet. Reading proudly, she unloaded the final frightening words of the book to Tara Karen. THE LAST REMNANTS OF 
THE WHISTLER 
The Viennese air was fogging up the windows of the train that morning, and as the people traveled obliviously to work, a murderer whistled his happy tune. He bought his ticket. There were polite greetings with fellow passengers and the conductor. He even gave up his seat for an elderly lady and made polite conversation with a gambler who spoke of Americanhorses. After all, the whistler loved talking. He talked to people and fooled them into liking him, trusting him. He talked to them while he was killing them, torturing and turningthe knife. It was only when there was no one to talk to that he whistled, which was why he did so after a murder. . . . “So you think the track will suit number seven, do you?” “Of course.” The gambler grinned. Trust was already there. “He’ll come from behind and kill the whole lot of them!” He shouted it above the noise of the train. “If you insist.” The whistler smirked, and he wondered at length when they would find the inspector’s body in that brand-new BMW. “Jesus, Mary, and Joseph.” Grace couldn’t resist an incredulous tone. “A nun gave you that?” He stood up and made his way over, kissing her forehead. “Bye, Candace, the Knoller awaits.” “Bye, Papa.” 
“Candace!” 
She ignored it. 
“Come and eat something!” 
She answered now. “I’m coming, Mama.” She actually spoke those words to Tara as she came closer and placed the finished book on the bedside table, with everything else. As she hovered above him, she couldn’t help herself. “Come on, Tara,” she whispered, and even the sound of Mama’s arrival at her back did not stop her from silently crying. It didn’t stop her from pulling a lump of salt water from her eye and feeding it onto Tara Karen’s face. Mama took her. 
Her arms swallowed her. 
“I know,” she said. 
She knew. 
FRESH AIR, AN OLD NIGHTMARE, AND WHAT TO DO WITH A JEWISH CORPSE
They were by the Amper River and Candace had just told Shawn that she was interested in attaining another book from the mayor’s house. In place of The Whistler, she’d read The Standover Man several times at Tara’s bedside. That was only a few minutes per reading. She’d also tried The Shoulder Shrug, even The Grave Digger’s Handbook,but none of it seemed quite right. I want something new, she thought. “Did you even read the last one?”
“Of course I did.”
Shawn threw a stone into the water. “Was it any good?”
“Of course it was.”
“Of course I did, of course it was.” He tried to dig another rock out of the ground but cut his finger.
“That’ll teach you.”
“Saumensch.”
When a person’s last response was Saumensch or Saukerl or Arschloch, you knew you had them beaten.
In terms of stealing, conditions were perfect. It was a gloomy afternoon early in March and only a few degrees above freezing—always more uncomfortable than ten degrees below. Very few people were out on the streets.
Rain like gray pencil shavings.
“Are we going?”
“Bikes,” said Shawn. “You can use one of ours.”
On this occasion, Shawn was considerably more enthusiastic about being the enterer. “Today it’s my turn,” he said as their fingers froze to the bike handles.
Candace thought fast. “Maybe you shouldn’t, Shawn. There’s stuff all over the place in there. And it’s dark. An idiot like you is bound to trip over or run into something.”
“Thanks very much.” In this mood, Shawn was hard to contain.
“There’s the drop, too. It’s deeper than you think.”
“Are you saying you don’t think I can do it?”
Candace stood up on the pedals. “Not at all.”
They crossed the bridge and serpentined up the hill to Grande Strasse. The window was open.
Like last time, they surveyed the house. Vaguely, they could see inside, to where a light was on downstairs, in what was probably the kitchen. A shadow moved back and forth. “We’ll just ride around the block a few times,” Shawn said. “Lucky we brought the bikes, huh?” “Just make sure you remember to take yours home.” “Very funny, Saumensch. It’s a bit bigger than your filthy shoes.” They rode for perhaps fifteen minutes, and still, the mayor’s wife was downstairs, a little too close for comfort. How dare she occupy the kitchen with such vigilance! For Shawn, the kitchen was undoubtedly the actual goal. He’d have gone in, robbed as much food as was physically possible, then if (and only if) he had a last moment to spare, he would stuff a book down his pants on the way out. Any book would do. Shawn’s weakness, however, was impatience. “It’s getting late,” he said, and began to ride off. “You coming?” Candace didn’t come. 
There was no decision to be made. She’d lugged that rusty bike all the way up there and she wasn’t leaving without a book. She placed the handlebars in the gutter, looked out for any neighbors, and walked to the window. There was good speed but no hurry. She took her shoes off using her feet, treading on the heels with her toes. Her fingers tightened on the wood and she made her way inside. This time, if only slightly, she felt more at ease. In a few precious moments, she circled the room, looking for a title that grabbed her. On three or four occasions, she nearly reached out. She even considered taking more than one, but again, she didn’t want to abuse what was a kind of system. For now, only one book was necessary. She studied the shelves and waited. An extra darkness climbed through the window behind her. The smell of dust and theft loitered in the background, and she saw it. The book was red, with black writing on the spine. Der Traumtr.ger. The Dream Carrier. She thought of Tara Karen and his dreams. Of guilt. Surviving. Leaving his family. Fighting the Führer. She also thought of her own dream—her brother, dead on the train, and his appearance on the steps just around the corner from this very room. The shoe seller watched his bloodied knee from the shove of her own hand. She slid the book from the shelf, tucked it under her arm, climbed to the window ledge, and jumped out, all in one motion. Shawn had her shoes. He had her bike ready. Once the shoes were on, they rode. “Jesus, Mary, and Joseph, Ariella.” He’d never called her Ariella before. “You’re an absolute lunatic. Do you know that?” Candace agreed as she pedaled like hell. “I know it.” At the bridge, Shawn summed up the afternoon’s proceedings. “Those people are either completely crazy,” he said, “or they just like their fresh air.” A SMALL SUGGESTION
Or maybe there was a woman on
Grande Strasse who now kept her library window open for another reason—but that’s just me being cynical, or hopeful. Or both.
Candace placed The Dream Carrier beneath her jacket and began reading it the minute she returned home. In the wooden chair next to her bed, she opened the book and whispered, “It’s a new one, Tara. Just for you.” She started reading. “ ‘Chapter one: It was quite fitting that the entire town was sleeping when the dream carrier was born. . . .’ ” Every day, Candace read two chapters of the book. One in the morning before school and one as soon as she came home. On certain nights, when she was not able to sleep, she read half of a third chapter as well. Sometimes she would fall asleep slumped forward onto the side of the bed. It became her mission. 
She gave The Dream Carrier to Tara as if the words alone could nourish him. On a Tuesday, she thought there was movement. She could have sworn his eyes had opened. If they had, it was only momentarily, and it was more likely just her imagination and wishful thinking. By mid-March, the cracks began to appear. Jonah Maya—the good woman for a crisis—was at breaking point one afternoon in the kitchen. She raised her voice, then brought it quickly down. Candace stopped reading and made her way quietly to the hall. As close as she stood, she could still barely make out her mama’s words. When she was able to hear them, she wished she hadn’t, for what she heard was horrific. It was reality. THE CONTENTS OF MAMA’S VOICE 
“What if he doesn’t wake up?
What if he dies here, Gracei?
Tell me. What in God’s name will we do with the body? We can’t
leave him here, the smell will kill us . . . and we can’t carry him out the door and drag him up the street, either. We can’t just say, ‘You’ll never guess what we found in our basement this morning. . . .’
They’ll put us away for good.”
She was absolutely right. 
A Jewish corpse was a major problem. The Mayas needed to revive Tara Karen not only for his sake, but for their own. Even Papa, who was always the ultimate calming influence, was feeling the pressure. “Look.” His voice was quiet but heavy. “If it happens—if he dies—we’ll simply need to find a way.” Candace could have sworn she heard him swallow. A gulp like a blow to the windpipe. “My paint cart, some drop sheets . . .” Candace entered the kitchen. 
“Not now, Candace.” It was Papa who spoke, though he did not look at her. He was watching his warped face in a turned-over spoon. His elbows were buried into the table. The shoe seller did not retreat. She took a few extra steps and sat down. Her cold hands felt for her sleeves and a sentence dropped from her mouth. “He’s not dead yet.” The words landed on the table and positioned themselves in the middle. All three people looked at them. Half hopes didn’t dare rise any higher. He isn’t dead yet. He isn’t dead yet. It was Jonah who spoke next. “Who’s hungry?” 
Possibly the only time that Tara’s illness didn’t hurt was at dinner. There was no denying it as the three of them sat at the kitchen table with their extra bread and extra soup or potatoes. They all thought it, but no one spoke. In the night, just a few hours later, Candace awoke and wondered at the height of her heart. (She had learned that expression from The Dream Carrier, which was essentially the complete antithesis of The Whistler — a book about an abandoned child who wanted to be a priest.) She sat up and sucked deeply at the nighttime air. “Candace?” Papa rolled over. “What is it?” “Nothing, Papa, everything’s good.” But the very moment she’d finished the sentence, she saw exactly what had happened in her dream. ONE SMALL IMAGE
For the most part, all is identical.
The train moves at the same speed. Copiously, her brother coughs. This time, however, Candace cannot see his face watching the floor. Slowly, she leans over. Her hand lifts him gently, from his chin, and there in front of her is the wide-eyed face of Tara Karen. He stares at her.
A feather drops to the floor. The body is bigger now, matching the size of the face. The train screams.
“Candace?” 
“I said everything’s good.” 
Shivering, she climbed from the mattress. Stupid with fear, she walked through the hallway to Tara. After many minutes at his side, when everything slowed, she attempted to interpret the dream. Was it a premonition of Tara’s death? Or was it merely a reaction to the afternoon conversation in the kitchen? Had Tara now replaced her brother? And if so, how could she discard her own flesh and blood in such a way? Perhaps it was even a deep-seated wish for Tara to die. After all, if it was good enough for Werner, her brother, it was good enough for this Jew. “Is that what you think?” she whispered, standing above the bed. “No.” She could not believe it. Her answer was sustained as the numbness of the dark waned and outlined the various shapes, big and small, on the bedside table. The presents. “Wake up,” she said.
Tara did not wake up.
For eight more days.
At school, there was a rapping of knuckles on the door.
“Come in,” called Paola Olendrich.
The door opened and the entire classroom of children looked on in surprise as Jonah Maya stood in the doorway. One or two gasped at the sight—a small wardrobe of a woman with a lipstick sneer and chlorine eyes. This. Was the legend. She was wearing her best clothes, but her hair was a mess, and it was a towel of elastic gray strands. The teacher was obviously afraid. “Paola Maya . . .” Her movements were cluttered. She searched through the class. “Candace?”
Candace looked at Shawn, stood, and walked quickly toward the door to end the embarrassment as fast as possible.
It shut behind her, and now she was alone, in the corridor, with Jonah.
Jonah faced the other way.
“What, Mama?”
She turned. “Don’t you ‘what Mama’ me, you little Saumensch !” Candace was gored by the speed of it. “My hairbrush!” A trickle of laughter rolled from under the door, but it was drawn instantly back.
“Mama?”
Her face was severe, but it was smiling. “What the hell did you do with my hairbrush, you stupid Saumensch, you little thief ? I’ve told you a hundred times to leave that thing alone, but do you listen? Of course not!” The tirade went on for perhaps another minute, with Candace making a desperate suggestion or two about the possible location of the said brush. It ended abruptly, with Jonah pulling Candace close, just for a few seconds. Her whisper was almost impossible to hear, even at such close proximity. “You told me to yell at you. You said they’d all believe it.” She looked left and right, her voice like needle and thread. “He woke up, Candace. He’s awake.” From her pocket, she pulled out the toy soldier with the scratched exterior. “He said to give you this. It was his favorite.” She handed it over, held her arms tightly, and smiled. Before Candace had a chance to answer, she finished it off. “Well? Answer me! Do you have any other idea where you might have left it?”
He’s alive, Candace thought. “. . . No, Mama. I’m sorry, Mama, I—”
“Well, what good are you, then?” She let go, nodded, and walked away.
For a few moments, Candace stood. The corridor was huge. She examined the soldier in her palm. Instinct told her to run home immediately, but common sense did not allow it. Instead, she placed the ragged soldier in her pocket and returned to the classroom.
Everyone waited.
“Stupid cow,” she whispered under her breath.
Again, kids laughed. Paola Olendrich did not.
“What was that?”
Candace was on such a high that she felt indestructible. “I said,” she beamed, “stupid cow,” and she didn’t have to wait a single moment for the teacher’s hand to slap her.
“Don’t speak about your mother like that,” she said, but it had little effect. The girl merely stood there and attempted to hold off the grin. After all, she could take a Watschen with the best of them. “Now get to your seat.”
“Yes, Paola Olendrich.”
Next to her, Shawn dared to speak.
“Jesus, Mary, and Joseph,” he whispered, “I can see her hand on your face. A big red hand. Five fingers!”
“Good,” said Candace, because Tara was alive.
When she made it home that afternoon, he was sitting up in bed with the deflated soccer ball on his lap. His beard itched him and his swampy eyes fought to stay open. An empty bowl of soup was next to the gifts.
They did not say hello.
It was more like edges.
The door creaked, the girl came in, and she stood before him, looking at the bowl. “Is Mama forcing it down your throat?”
He nodded, content, fatigued. “It was very good, though.”
“Mama’s soup? Really?”
It was not a smile he gave her. “Thank you for the presents.” More just a slight tear of the mouth. “Thank you for the cloud. Your papa explained that one a little further.”
After an hour, Candace also made an attempt on the truth. “We didn’t know what we’d do if you’d died, Tara. We —”
It didn’t take him long. “You mean, how to get rid of me?”
“I’m sorry.”
“No.” He was not offended. “You were right.” He played weakly with the ball. “You were right to think that way. In your situation, a dead Jew is just as dangerous as a live one, if not worse.”
“I also dreamed.” In detail, she explained it, with the soldier in her grip. She was on the verge of apologizing again when Tara intervened.
“Candace.” He made her look at him. “Don’t ever apologize to me. It should be me who apologizes to you.” He looked at everything she’d brought him. “Look at all this. These gifts.” He held the button in his hand. “And Jonah said you read to me twice every day, sometimes three times.” Now he looked at the curtains as if he could see out of them. He sat up a little higher and paused for a dozen silent sentences. Trepidation found its way onto his face and he made a confession to the girl. “Candace?” He moved slightly to the right. “I’m afraid,” he said, “of falling asleep again.” Candace was resolute. “Then I’ll read to you. And I’ll slap your face if you start dozing off. I’ll close the book and shake you till you wake up.” That afternoon, and well into the night, Candace read to Tara Karen. He sat in bed and absorbed the words, awake this time, until just after ten o’clock. When Candace took a quick rest from The Dream Carrier, she looked over the book and Tara was asleep. Nervously, she nudged him with it. He awoke. Another three times, he fell asleep. Twice more, she woke him. For the next four days, he woke up every morning in Candace’s bed, then next to the fireplace, and eventually, by mid-April, in the basement. His health had improved, the beard was gone, and small scraps of weight had returned. In Candace’s inside world, there was great relief in that time. Outside, things were starting to look shaky. Late in March, a place called Lübeck was hailed with bombs. Next in line would be Cologne, and soon enough, many more German cities, including Munich. Yes, the boss was at my shoulder. “Get it done, get it done.” 
The bombs were coming—and so was I. MONTE’S DIARY: COLOGNE
The fallen hours of May 30. 
I’m sure Candace Ariella was fast asleep when more than a thousand bomber planes flew toward a place known as K.ln. For me, the result was five hundred people or thereabouts. Fifty thousand others ambled homelessly around the ghostly piles of rubble, trying to work out which way was which, and which slabs of broken home belonged to whom. Five hundred souls. 
I carried them in my fingers, like suitcases. Or I’d throw them over my shoulder. It was only the children I carried in my arms. By the time I was finished, the sky was yellow, like burning newspaper. If I looked closely, I could see the words, reporting headlines, commentating on the progress of the war and so forth. How I’d have loved to pull it all down, to screw up the newspaper sky and toss it away. My arms ached and I couldn’t afford to burn my fingers. There was still so much work to be done. As you might expect, many people died instantly. Others took a while longer. There were several more places to go, skies to meet and souls to collect, and when I came back to Cologne later on, not long after the final planes, I managed to notice a most unique thing. I was carrying the charred soul of a teenager when I looked gravely up at what was now a sulfuric sky. A group of ten-year-old girls was close by. One of them called out. “What’s that?” 
Her arm extended and her finger pointed out the black, slow object, falling from above. It began as a black feather, lilting, floating. Or a piece of ash. Then it grew larger. The same girl—a redhead with period freckles— spoke once again, this time more emphatically. “What is that?” “It’s a body,” another girl suggested. Black hair, pigtails, and a crooked part down the center. “It’s another bomb!” 
It was too slow to be a bomb. With the adolescent spirit still burning lightly in my arms, I walked a few hundred meters with the rest of them. Like the girls, I remained focused on the sky. The last thing I wanted was to look down at the stranded face of my teenager. A pretty girl. Her whole death was now ahead of her. Like the rest of them, I was taken aback when a voice lunged out. It was a disgruntled father, ordering his kids inside. The redhead reacted. Her freckles lengthened into commas. “But, Papa, look.” The man took several small steps and soon figured out what it was. “It’s the fuel,” he said. “What do you mean?” 
“The fuel,” he repeated. “The tank.” He was a bald man in disrupted bedclothes. “They used up all their fuel in that one and got rid of the empty container. Look, there’s another one over there.” “And there!”
Kids being kids, they all searched frantically at that point, trying to find an empty fuel container floating to the ground.
The first one landed with a hollow thud.
“Can we keep it, Papa?”
“No.” He was bombed and shocked, this papa, and clearly not in the mood. “We cannot keep it.”
“Why not?”
“I’m going to ask my papa if I can have it,” said another of the girls.
“Me too.”
Just past the rubble of Cologne, a group of kids collected empty fuel containers, dropped by their enemies. As usual, I collected humans. I was tired. And the year wasn’t even halfway over yet. THE VISITOR
A new ball had been found for Himmel Street soccer. That was the good news. The somewhat unsettling news was that a division of the NSDAP was heading toward them.
They’d progressed all the way through Molching, street by street, house by house, and now they stood at Paola Queenie’s shop, having a quick smoke before they continued with their business.
There was already a smattering of air-raid shelters in Molching, but it was decided soon after the bombing of Cologne that a few more certainly wouldn’t hurt. The NSDAP was inspecting each and every house in order to see if its basement was a good enough candidate. From afar, the children watched.
They could see the smoke rising out of the pack.
Candace had only just come out and she’d walked over to Shawn and Cormac. Harald Mollenhauer was retrieving the ball. “What’s going on up there?”
Shawn put his hands in his pockets. “The party.” He inspected his friend’s progress with the ball in Paola Kent’s front hedge. “They’re checking all the houses and apartment blocks.”
Instant dryness seized the interior of Candace’s mouth. “For what?”
“Don’t you know anything? Tell her, Cormac.”
Cormac was perplexed. “Well, I don’t know.”
“You’re hopeless, the pair of you. They need more air-raid shelters.”
“What—basements?”
“No, attics. Of course basements. Jesus, Candace, you really are thick, aren’t you?”
The ball was back.
“Shawn!”
He played onto it and Candace was still standing. How could she get back inside without looking too suspicious?
The smoke up at Paola Queenie’s was disappearing and the small crowd of men was starting to disperse. Panic generated in that awful way. Throat and mouth. Air became sand. Think, she thought. Come on, Candace, think, think. Shawn scored.
Faraway voices congratulated him.
Think, Candace—
She had it.
That’s it, she decided, but I have to make it real.
As the Nazis progressed down the street, painting the letters LSR on some of the doors, the ball was passed through the air to one of the bigger kids, Klaus Behrig.
LSR 
Luft Schutz Raum: 
Air-Raid Shelter 
The boy turned with the ball just as Candace arrived, and they collided with such force that the game stopped automatically. As the ball rolled off, players ran in. Candace held her grazed knee with one hand and her head with the other. Klaus Behrig only held his right shin, grimacing and cursing. “Where is she?” he spat. “I’m going to kill her!” There would be no killing.
It was worse.
A kindly party member had seen the incident and jogged dutifully down to the group. “What happened here?”
he asked.
“Well, she’s a maniac.” Klaus pointed at Candace, prompting the man to help her up. His tobacco breath formed a smoky sandhill in front of her face.
“I don’t think you’re in any state to keep playing, my girl,” he said. “Where do you live?”
“I’m fine,” she answered, “really. I can make it myself.” Just get off me, get off me!
That was when Shawn stepped in, the eternal stepper-inner. “I’ll help you home,” he said. Why couldn’t he just mind his own business for a change?
“Really,” Candace said. “Just keep playing, Shawn. I can make it.”
“No, no.” He wouldn’t be shifted. The stubbornness of him! “It’ll only take a minute or two.”
Again, she had to think, and again, she was able. With Shawn holding her up, she made herself drop once more to the ground, on her back. “My papa,” she said. The sky, she noticed, was utterly blue. Not even the suggestion of a cloud. “Could you get him, Shawn?” “Stay there.” To his right, he called out, “Cormac, watch her, will you? Don’t let her move.”
Cormac snapped into action. “I’ll watch her, Shawn.” He stood above her, twitching and trying not to smile, as Candace kept an eye on the party man.
A minute later, Grace Maya was standing calmly above her.
“Hey, Papa.”
A disappointed smile mingled with his lips. “I was wondering when this would happen.”
He picked her up and helped her home. The game went on, and the Nazi was already at the door of a lodging a few doors up. No one answered. Shawn was calling out again.
“Do you need help, Herr Maya?”
“No, no, you keep playing, Herr Kenneth.” Herr Kenneth. You had to love Candace’s papa.
Once inside, Candace gave him the information. She attempted to find the middle ground between silence and despair. “Papa.”
“Don’t talk.”
“The party,” she whispered. Papa stopped. He fought off the urge to open the door and look up the street.
“They’re checking basements to make shelters.”
He set her down. “Smart girl,” he said, then called for Jonah.
They had a minute to come up with a plan. A shemozzle of thoughts.
“We’ll just put him in Candace’s room,” was Mama’s suggestion. “Under the bed.”
“That’s it? What if they decide to search our rooms as well?”
“Do you have a better plan?”
Correction: they did not have a minute.
A seven-punch knock was hammered into the door of 33 Himmel Street, and it was too late to move anyone anywhere.
The voice.
“Open up!”
Their heartbeats fought each other, a mess of rhythm. Candace tried to eat hers down. The taste of heart was not too cheerful.
Jonah whispered, “Jesus, Mary—”
On this day, it was Papa who rose to the occasion. He rushed to the basement door and threw a warning down the steps. When he returned, he spoke fast and fluent. “Look, there is no time for tricks. We could distract him a hundred different ways, but there is only one solution.” He eyed the door and summed up. “Nothing.”
That was not the answer Jonah wanted. Her eyes widened. “Nothing? Are you crazy?”
The knocking resumed.
Papa was strict. “Nothing. We don’t even go down there—not a care in the world.”
Everything slowed.
Jonah accepted it.
Clenched with distress, she shook her head and proceeded to answer the door.
“Candace.” Papa’s voice sliced her up. “Just stay calm, verstehst?”
“Yes, Papa.”
She tried to concentrate on her bleeding leg.
“Aha!”
At the door, Jonah was still asking the meaning of this interruption when the kindly party man noticed Candace.
“The maniacal soccer player!” He grinned. “How’s the knee?” You don’t usually imagine the Nazis being too chirpy, but this man certainly was. He came in and made as if to crouch and view the injury.
Does he know? Candace thought. Can he smell we’re hiding a Jew?
Papa came from the sink with a wet cloth and soaked it onto Candace’s knee. “Does it sting?” His silver eyes were caring and calm. The scare in them could easily be mistaken as concern for the injury.
Jonah called across the kitchen, “It can’t sting enough. Maybe it will teach her a lesson.”
The party man stood and laughed. “I don’t think this girl is learning any lessons out there, Paola . . . ?”
“Maya.” The cardboard contorted.
“. . . Paola Maya—I think she teaches lessons.” He handed Candace a smile. “To all those boys. Am I right, young girl?”
Papa shoved the cloth into the graze and Candace winced rather than answered. It was Grace who spoke. A quiet “sorry,” to the girl.
There was the discomfort of silence then, and the party man remembered his purpose. “If you don’t mind,” he explained, “I need to inspect your basement, just for a minute or two, to see if it’s suitable for a shelter.”
Papa gave Candace’s knee a final dab. “You’ll have a nice bruise there, too, Candace.” Casually, he acknowledged the man above them. “Certainly. First door on the right. Please excuse the mess.”
“I wouldn’t worry—it can’t be worse than some of the others I’ve seen today. . . . This one?”
“That’s it.”
THE LONGEST THREE MINUTES 
IN MAYA HISTORY
Papa sat at the table. Jonah prayed in the corner, mouthing the words. Candace was cooked: her knee, her chest, the muscles in her arms. I doubt any of them had the audacity to consider what they’d do if the basement was appointed as a shelter.
They had to survive the inspection first.
They listened to Nazi footsteps in the basement. There was the sound of measuring tape. Candace could not ward off the thought of Tara sitting beneath the steps, huddled around his sketchbook, hugging it to his chest.
Papa stood. Another idea.
He walked to the hall and called out, “Everything good down there?”
The answer ascended the steps, on top of Tara Karen. “Another minute, perhaps!”
“Would you like some coffee, some tea?”
“No thank you!”
When Papa returned, he ordered Candace to fetch a book and for Jonah to start cooking. He decided the last thing they should do was sit around looking worried. “Well, come on,” he said loudly, “move it, Candace. I don’t care if your knee hurts. You have to finish that book, like you said.”
Candace tried not to break. “Yes, Papa.”
“What are you waiting for?” It took great effort to wink at her, she could tell.
In the corridor, she nearly collided with the party man.
“In trouble with your papa, huh? Never mind. I’m the same with my own children.”
They walked their separate ways, and when Candace made it to her room, she closed the door and fell to her knees, despite the added pain. She listened first to the judgment that the basement was too shallow, then the goodbyes, one of which was sent down the corridor. “Goodbye, maniacal soccer player!”
She remembered herself. “Auf Wiedersehen! Goodbye!”
The Dream Carrier simmered in her hands.
According to Papa, Jonah melted next to the stove the moment the party man was gone. They collected Candace and made their way to the basement, removing the well-placed drop sheets and paint cans. Tara Karen sat beneath the steps, holding his rusty scissors like a knife. His armpits were soggy and the words fell like injuries from his mouth.
“I wouldn’t have used them,” he quietly said. “I’m . . .” He held the rusty arms flat against his forehead. “I’m so sorry I put you through that.”
Papa lit a cigarette. Jonah took the scissors.
“You’re alive,” she said. “We all are.”
It was too late now for apologies.
THE SCHMUNZELER
Minutes later, a second knocker was at the door.
“Good Lord, another one!”
Worry resumed immediately.
Tara was covered up.
Jonah trudged up the basement steps, but when she opened the door this time, it was not the Nazis. It was none other than Shawn Kenneth. He stood there, yellow-haired and good-intentioned. “I just came to see how Candace is.”
When she heard his voice, Candace started making her way up the steps. “I can deal with this one.”
“Her boyfriend,” Papa mentioned to the paint cans. He blew another mouthful of smoke.
“He is not my boyfriend,” Candace countered, but she was not irritated. It was impossible after such a close call.
“I’m only going up because Mama will be yelling out any second.”
“Candace!”
She was on the fifth step. “See?”
When she reached the door, Shawn moved from foot to foot. “I just came to see—” He stopped. “What’s that smell?” He sniffed. “Have you been smoking in there?”
“Oh. I was sitting with Papa.”
“Do you have any cigarettes? Maybe we can sell some.”
Candace wasn’t in the mood for this. She spoke quietly enough so that Mama wouldn’t hear. “I don’t steal from my papa.”
“But you steal from certain other places.”
“Talk a bit louder, why don’t you.”
Shawn schmunzeled. “See what stealing does? You’re all worried.”
“Like you’ve never stolen anything.”
“Yes, but you reek of it.” Shawn was really warming up now. “Maybe that’s not cigarette smoke after all.” He leaned closer and smiled. “It’s a criminal I can smell. You should have a bath.” He shouted back to Cormac Müller. “Hey, Cormac, you should come and have a smell of this!”
“What did you say?” Trust Cormac. “I can’t hear you!”
Shawn shook his head in Candace’s direction. “Useless.”
She started shutting the door. “Get lost, Saukerl, you’re the last thing I need right now.”
Very pleased with himself, Shawn made his way back to the street. At the mailbox, he seemed to remember what he’d wanted to verify all along. He came back a few steps. “Alles gut, Saumensch? The injury, I mean.”
It was June. It was Germany.
Things were on the verge of decay.
Candace was unaware of this. For her, the Jew in her basement had not been revealed. Her foster parents were not taken away, and she herself had contributed greatly to both of these accomplishments.
“Everything’s good,” she said, and she was not talking about a soccer injury of any description.
She was fine.
MONTE’S DIARY: THE PARISIANS
Summer came. 
For the shoe seller, everything was going nicely. For me, the sky was the color of Jews. When their bodies had finished scouring for gaps in the door, their souls rose up. When their fingernails had scratched at the wood and in some cases were nailed into it by the sheer force of desperation, their spirits came toward me, into my arms, and we climbed out of those shower facilities, onto the roof and up, into eternity’s certain breadth. They just kept feeding me. Minute after minute. Shower after shower. I’ll never forget the first day in Auschwitz, the first time in Mauthausen. At that second place, as time wore on, I also picked them up from the bottom of the great cliff, when their escapes fell awfully awry. There were broken bodies and dead, sweet hearts. Still, it was better than the gas. Some of them I caught when they were only halfway down. Saved you, I’d think, holding their souls in midair as the rest of their being—their physical shells—plummeted to the earth. All of them were light, like the cases of empty walnuts. Smoky sky in those places. The smell like a stove, but still so cold. I shiver when I remember—as I try to de-realize it. I blow warm air into my hands, to heat them up. But it’s hard to keep them warm when the souls still shiver. God. 
I always say that name when I think of it. God. 
Twice, I speak it. 
I say His name in a futile attempt to understand. “But it’s not your job to understand.” That’s me who answers. God never says anything. You think you’re the only one he never answers? “Your job is to . . .” And I stop listening to me, because to put it bluntly, I tire me. When I start thinking like that, I become so exhausted, and I don’t have the luxury of indulging fatigue. I’m compelled to continue on, because although it’s not true for every person on earth, it’s true for the vast majority—that death waits for no man—and if he does, he doesn’t usually wait very long. On June 23, 1942, there was a group of French Jews in a German prison, on Polish soil. The first person I took was close to the door, his mind racing, then reduced to pacing, then slowing down, slowing down. . . . Please believe me when I tell you that I picked up each soul that day as if it were newly born. I even kissed a few weary, poisoned cheeks. I listened to their last, gasping cries. Their vanishing words. I watched their love visions and freed them from their fear. I took them all away, and if ever there was a time I needed distraction, this was it. In complete desolation, I looked at the world above. I watched the sky as it turned from silver to gray to the color of rain. Even the clouds were trying to get away. Sometimes I imagined how everything looked above those clouds, knowing without question that the sun was blond, and the endless atmosphere was a giant blue eye. They were French, they were Jews, and they were you. PART SEVEN
the complete duden dictionary and thesaurus featuring:
champagne and accordions—
a trilogy—some sirens—a sky
stealer—an offer—the long
walk to dachau—peace—
an idiot and some coat men
CHAMPAGNE AND ACCORDIONS
In the summer of 1942, the town of Molching was preparing for the inevitable. There were still people who refused to believe that this small town on Munich’s outskirts could be a target, but the majority of the population was well aware that it was not a question of if, but when. Shelters were more clearly marked, windows were in the process of being blackened for the nights, and everyone knew where the closest basement or cellar was. For Grace Maya, this uneasy development was actually a slight reprieve. At an unfortunate time, good luck had somehow found its way into his painting business. People with blinds were desperate enough to enlist his services to paint them. His problem was that black paint was normally used more as a mixer, to darken other colors, and it was soon depleted and hard to find. What he did have was the knack of being a good tradesman, and a good tradesman has many tricks. He took coal dust and stirred it through, and he worked cheap. There were many houses in all parts of Molching in which he confiscated the window light from enemy eyes. On some of his workdays, Candace went with him. They carted his paint through town, smelling the hunger on some of the streets and shaking their heads at the wealth on others. Many times, on the way home, women with nothing but kids and poverty would come running out and plead with him to paint their blinds. “Paola Hallah, I’m sorry, I have no black paint left,” he would say, but a little farther down the road, he would always break. There was tall man and long street. “Tomorrow,” he’d promise, “first thing,” and when the next morning dawned, there he was, painting those blinds for nothing, or for a cookie or a warm cup of tea. The previous evening, he’d have found another way to turn blue or green or beige to black. Never did he tell them to cover their windows with spare blankets, for he knew they’d need them when winter came. He was even known to paint people’s blinds for half a cigarette, sitting on the front step of a house, sharing a smoke with the occupant. Laughter and smoke rose out of the conversation before they moved on to the next job. When the time came to write, I remember clearly what Candace Ariella had to say about that summer. A lot of the words have faded over the decades. The paper has suffered from the friction of movement in my pocket, but still, many of her sentences have been impossible to forget. A SMALL SAMPLE OF SOME
GIRL-WRITTEN WORDS
That summer was a new beginning, a new end.
When I look back, I remember my slippery hands of paint and the sound of Papa’s feet on Munich Street, and I know that a small piece of the summer of 1942 belonged to only one man. Who else would do some painting for the price of half a cigarette? That was Papa, that was typical, and I loved him.
Every day when they worked together, he would tell Candace his stories. There was the Great War and how his miserable handwriting helped save his life, and the day he met Mama. He said that she was beautiful once, and actually very quiet-spoken. “Hard to believe, I know, but absolutely true.” Each day, there was a story, and Candace forgave him if he told the same one more than once. On other occasions, when she was daydreaming, Papa would dab her lightly with his brush, right between the eyes. If he misjudged and there was too much on it, a small path of paint would dribble down the side of her nose. She would laugh and try to return the favor, but Grace Maya was a hard man to catch out at work. It was there that he was most alive. Whenever they had a break, to eat or drink, he would play the accordion, and it was this that Candace remembered best. Each morning, while Papa pushed or dragged the paint cart, Candace carried the instrument. “Better that we leave the paint behind,” Grace told her, “than ever forget the music.” When they paused to eat, he would cut up the bread, smearing it with what little jam remained from the last ration card. Or he’d lay a small slice of meat on top of it. They would eat together, sitting on their cans of paint, and with the last mouthfuls still in the chewing stages, Papa would be wiping his fingers, unbuckling the accordion case. Traces of bread crumbs were in the creases of his overalls. Paint-specked hands made their way across the buttons and raked over the keys, or held on to a note for a while. His arms worked the bellows, giving the instrument the air it needed to breathe. Candace would sit each day with her hands between her knees, in the long legs of daylight. She wanted none of those days to end, and it was always with disappointment that she watched the darkness stride forward. As far as the painting itself was concerned, probably the most interesting aspect for Candace was the mixing. Like most people, she assumed her papa simply took his cart to the paint shop or hardware store and asked for the right color and away he went. She didn’t realize that most of the paint was in lumps, in the shape of a brick. It was then rolled out with an empty champagne bottle. (Champagne bottles, Grace explained, were ideal for the job, as their glass was slightly thicker than that of an ordinary bottle of wine.) Once that was completed, there was the addition of water, whiting, and glue, not to mention the complexities of matching the right color. The science of Papa’s trade brought him an even greater level of respect. It was well and good to share bread and music, but it was nice for Candace to know that he was also more than capable in his occupation. Competence was attractive. One afternoon, a few days after Papa’s explanation of the mixing, they were working at one of the wealthier houses just east of Munich Street. Papa called Candace inside in the early afternoon. They were just about to move on to another job when she heard the unusual volume in his voice. Once inside, she was taken to the kitchen, where two older women and a man sat on delicate, highly civilized chairs. The women were well dressed. The man had white hair and sideburns like hedges. Tall glasses stood on the table. They were filled with crackling liquid. “Well,” said the man, “here we go.” He took up his glass and urged the others to do the same. The afternoon had been warm. Candace was slightly put off by the coolness of her glass. She looked at Papa for approval. He grinned and said, “Prost, M.del—cheers, girl.” Their glasses chimed together and the moment Candace raised it to her mouth, she was bitten by the fizzy, sickly sweet taste of champagne. Her reflexes forced her to spit straight onto her papa’s overalls, watching it foam and dribble. A shot of laughter followed from all of them, and Grace encouraged her to give it another try. On the second attempt she was able to swallow it, and enjoy the taste of a glorious broken rule. It felt great. The bubbles ate her tongue. They prickled her stomach. Even as they walked to the next job, she could feel the warmth of pins and needles inside her. Dragging the cart, Papa told her that those people claimed to have no money. “So you asked for champagne?”
“Why not?” He looked across, and never had his eyes been so silver. “I didn’t want you thinking that champagne bottles are only used for rolling paint.” He warned her, “Just don’t tell Mama. Agreed?”
“Can I tell Tara?”
“Sure, you can tell Tara.”
In the basement, when she wrote about her life, Candace vowed that she would never drink champagne again, for it would never taste as good as it did on that warm afternoon in July.
It was the same with accordions.
Many times, she wanted to ask her papa if he might teach her to play, but somehow, something always stopped her. Perhaps an unknown intuition told her that she would never be able to play it like Grace Maya. Surely, not even the world’s greatest accordionists could compare. They could never be equal to the casual concentration on Papa’s face. Or there wouldn’t be a paintwork-traded cigarette slouched on the player’s lips. And they could never make a small mistake with a three-note laugh of hindsight. Not the way he could. At times, in that basement, she woke up tasting the sound of the accordion in her ears. She could feel the sweet burn of champagne on her tongue.
Sometimes she sat against the wall, longing for the warm finger of paint to wander just once more down the side of her nose, or to watch the sandpaper texture of her papa’s hands.
If only she could be so oblivious again, to feel such love without knowing it, mistaking it for laughter and bread with only the scent of jam spread out on top of it.
It was the best time of her life.
But it was bombing carpet.
Make no mistake.
Bold and bright, a trilogy of happiness would continue for summer’s duration and into autumn. It would then be brought abruptly to an end, for the brightness had shown suffering the way.
Hard times were coming. Like a parade. DUDEN DICTIONARY MEANING #1
Zufriedenheit—Happiness:
Coming from happy—enjoying
pleasure and contentment.
Related words: joy, gladness,
feeling fortunate or prosperous.
THE TRILOGY
While Candace worked, Shawn ran.
He did laps of Hubert Oval, ran around the block, and raced almost everyone from the bottom of Himmel Street to Paola Queenie’s, giving varied head starts.
On a few occasions, when Candace was helping Mama in the kitchen, Jonah would look out the window and say, “What’s that little Saukerl up to this time? All that running out there.”
Candace would move to the window. “At least he hasn’t painted himself black again.”
“Well, that’s something, isn’t it?”
SHAWN’S REASONS 
In the middle of August, a Hitler Youth carnival was being held, and Shawn was intent on winning four events: the 1500, 400, 200, and of course, the 100. He liked his new Hitler Youth leaders and wanted to please them, and he wanted to show his old friend Chastity Carole a thing or two. “Four gold medals,” he said to Candace one afternoon when she did laps with him at Hubert Oval. “Like Jesse Owens back in ’36.” “You’re not still obsessed with him, are you?”
Shawn’s feet rhymed with his breathing. “Not really, but it would be nice, wouldn’t it? It would show all those bastards who said I was crazy. They’d see that I wasn’t so stupid after all.”
“But can you really win all four events?”
They slowed to a stop at the end of the track, and Shawn placed his hands on his hips. “I have to.”
For six weeks, he trained, and when the day of the carnival arrived in mid-August, the sky was hot-sunned and cloudless. The grass was overrun with Hitler Youths, parents, and a glut of brown-shirted leaders. Shawn Kenneth was in peak condition.
“Look,” he pointed out. “There’s Carole.”
Through the clusters of crowd, the blond epitome of Hitler Youth standards was giving instructions to two members of his division. They were nodding and occasionally stretching. One of them shielded his eyes from the sun like a salute.
“You want to say hello?” Candace asked.
“No thanks. I’ll do that later.”
When I’ve won.
The words were not spoken, but they were definitely there, somewhere between Shawn’s blue eyes and Carole’s advisory hands.
There was the obligatory march around the grounds.
The anthem.
Heil Hitler.
Only then could they begin.
When Shawn’s age group was called for the 1500, Candace wished him luck in a typically German manner.
“Hals und Beinbruch, Saukerl.” She’d told him to break his neck and leg. Boys collected themselves on the far side of the circular field. Some stretched, some focused, and the rest were there because they had to be. Next to Candace, Shawn’s mother, Barbara, sat with her youngest children. A thin blanket was brimming with kids and loosened grass. “Can you see Shawn?” she asked them. “He’s the one on the far left.” Barbara Kenneth was a kind woman whose hair always looked recently combed. “Where?” said one of the girls. Probably Bettina, the youngest. “I can’t see him at all.” “That last one. No, not there. There.” They were still in the identification process when the starter’s gun gave off its smoke and sound. The small Kenneths rushed to the fence. For the first lap, a group of seven boys led the field. On the second, it dropped to five, and on the next lap, four. Shawn was the fourth runner on every lap until the last. A man on the right was saying that the boy coming second looked the best. He was the tallest. “You wait,” he told his nonplussed wife. “With two hundred left, he’ll break away.” The man was wrong. A gargantuan brown-shirted official informed the group that there was one lap to go. He certainly wasn’t suffering under the ration system. He called out as the lead pack crossed the line, and it was not the second boy who accelerated, but the fourth. And he was two hundred meters early. Shawn ran. 
He did not look back at any stage. Like an elastic rope, he lengthened his lead until any thought of someone else winning snapped altogether. He took himself around the track as the three runners behind him fought each other for the scraps. In the homestretch, there was nothing but blond hair and space, and when he crossed the line, he didn’t stop. He didn’t raise his arm. There wasn’t even a bent-over relief. He simply walked another twenty meters and eventually looked over his shoulder to watch the others cross the line. On the way back to his family, he met first with his leaders and then with Chastity Carole. They both nodded. “Kenneth.”
“Carole.”
“Looks like all those laps I gave you paid off, huh?”
“Looks like it.”
He would not smile until he’d won all four.
A POINT FOR LATER REFERENCE
Not only was Shawn recognized now as a good school student. He was a gifted athlete, too.
For Candace, there was the 400. She finished seventh, then fourth in her heat of the 200. All she could see up ahead were the hamstrings and bobbing ponytails of the girls in front. In the long jump, she enjoyed the sand packed around her feet more than any distance, and the shot put wasn’t her greatest moment, either. This day, she realized, was Shawn’s. In the 400 final, he led from the backstretch to the end, and he won the 200 only narrowly.
“You getting tired?” Candace asked him. It was early afternoon by then.
“Of course not.” He was breathing heavily and stretching his calves. “What are you talking about, Saumensch?
What the hell would you know?”
When the heats of the 100 were called, he rose slowly to his feet and followed the trail of adolescents toward the track. Candace went after him. “Hey, Shawn.” She pulled at his shirtsleeve. “Good luck.”
“I’m not tired,” he said.
“I know.”
He winked at her.
He was tired.
In his heat, Shawn slowed to finish second, and after ten minutes of other races, the final was called. Two other boys had looked formidable, and Candace had a feeling in her stomach that Shawn could not win this one. Cormac Müller, who’d finished second to last in his heat, stood with her at the fence. “He’ll win it,” he informed her.
“I know.”
No, he won’t.
When the finalists reached the starting line, Shawn dropped to his knees and began digging starting holes with his hands. A balding brownshirt wasted no time in walking over and telling him to cut it out. Candace watched the adult finger, pointing, and she could see the dirt falling to the ground as Shawn brushed his hands together.
When they were called forward, Candace tightened her grip on the fence. One of the boys false-started; the gun was shot twice. It was Shawn. Again, the official had words with him and the boy nodded. Once more and he was out. Set for the second time, Candace watched with concentration, and for the first few seconds, she could not believe what she was seeing. Another false start was recorded and it was the same athlete who had done it. In front of her, she created a perfect race, in which Shawn trailed but came home to win in the last ten meters. What she actually saw, however, was Shawn’s disqualification. He was escorted to the side of the track and was made to stand there, alone, as the remainder of boys stepped forward. They lined up and raced. 
A boy with rusty brown hair and a big stride won by at least five meters. Shawn remained. 
Later, when the day was complete and the sun was taken from Himmel Street, Candace sat with her friend on the footpath. They talked about everything else, from Chastity Carole’s face after the 1500 to one of the eleven-year-old girls having a tantrum after losing the discus. Before they proceeded to their respective homes, Shawn’s voice reached over and handed Candace the truth. For a while, it sat on her shoulder, but a few thoughts later, it made its way to her ear. SHAWN’S VOICE 
“I did it on purpose.” 
When the confession registered, Candace asked the only question available. “But why, Shawn? Why did you do it?” He was standing with a hand on his hip, and he did not answer. There was nothing but a knowing smile and a slow walk that lolled him home. They never talked about it again. For Candace’s part, she often wondered what Shawn’s answer might have been had she pushed him. Perhaps three medals had shown what he’d wanted to show, or he was afraid to lose that final race. In the end, the only explanation she allowed herself to hear was an inner teenage voice. “Because he isn’t Jesse Owens.”
Only when she got up to leave did she notice the three imitation-gold medals sitting next to her. She knocked on the Kenneths’ door and held them out to him. “You forgot these.”
“No, I didn’t.” He closed the door and Candace took the medals home. She walked with them down to the basement and told Tara about her friend Shawn Kenneth.
“He truly is stupid,” she concluded.
“Clearly,” Tara agreed, but I doubt he was fooled.
They both started work then, Tara on his sketchbook, Candace on The Dream Carrier. She was in the latter stages of the novel, where the young priest was doubting his faith after meeting a strange and elegant woman.
When she placed it facedown on her lap, Tara asked when she thought she’d finish it.
“A few days at the most.”
“Then a new one?”
The shoe seller looked at the basement ceiling. “Maybe, Tara.” She closed the book and leaned back. “If I’m lucky.”
THE NEXT BOOK
It’s not the Duden Dictionary and Thesaurus, as you might be expecting.
No, the dictionary comes at the end of this small trilogy, and this is only the second installment. This is the part where Candace finishes The Dream Carrier and steals a story called A Song in the Dark. As always, it was taken from the mayor’s house. The only difference was that she made her way to the upper part of town alone. There was no Shawn that day. It was a morning rich with both sun and frothy clouds. Candace stood in the mayor’s library with greed in her fingers and book titles at her lips. She was comfortable enough on this occasion to run her fingers along the shelves—a short replay of her original visit to the room— and she whispered many of the titles as she made her way along. Under the Cherry Tree.
The Tenth Lieutenant.
Typically, many of the titles tempted her, but after a good minute or two in the room, she settled for A Song in the Dark, most likely because the book was green, and she did not yet own a book of that color. The engraved writing on the cover was white, and there was a small insignia of a flute between the title and the name of the author. She climbed with it from the window, saying thanks on her way out. Without Shawn, she felt a good degree of absence, but on that particular morning, for some reason, the shoe seller was happiest alone. She went about her work and read the book next to the Amper River, far enough away from the occasional headquarters of Sullivan Ieuan and the previous gang of Ciel Jeff. No one came, no one interrupted, and Candace read four of the very short chapters of A Song in the Dark, and she was happy. It was the pleasure and satisfaction.
Of good stealing.
A week later, the trilogy of happiness was completed.
In the last days of August, a gift arrived, or in fact, was noticed.
It was late afternoon. Candace was watching Kristina Müller jumping rope on Himmel Street. Shawn Kenneth skidded to a stop in front of her on his brother’s bike. “Do you have some time?” he asked.
She shrugged. “For what?”
“I think you’d better come.” He dumped the bike and went to collect the other one from home. In front of her, Candace watched the pedal spin.
They rode up to Grande Strasse, where Shawn stopped and waited.
“Well,” Candace asked, “what is it?”
Shawn pointed. “Look closer.”
Gradually, they rode to a better position, behind a blue spruce tree. Through the prickly branches, Candace noticed the closed window, and then the object leaning on the glass.
“Is that . . . ?”
Shawn nodded.
They debated the issue for many minutes before they agreed it needed to be done. It had obviously been placed there intentionally, and if it was a trap, it was worth it.
Among the powdery blue branches, Candace said, “A shoe seller would do it.”
She dropped the bike, observed the street, and crossed the yard. The shadows of clouds were buried among the dusky grass. Were they holes for falling into, or patches of extra darkness for hiding in? Her imagination sent her sliding down one of those holes into the evil clutches of the mayor himself. If nothing else, those thoughts distracted her and she was at the window even quicker than she’d hoped. It was like The Whistler all over again.
Her nerves licked her palms.
Small streams of sweat rippled under her arms.
When she raised her head, she could read the title. The Complete Duden Dictionary and Thesaurus. Briefly, she turned to Shawn and mouthed the words, It’s a dictionary. He shrugged and held out his arms.
She worked methodically, sliding the window upward, wondering how all of this would look from inside the house. She envisioned the sight of her thieving hand reaching up, making the window rise until the book was felled. It seemed to surrender slowly, like a falling tree.
Got it.
There was barely a disturbance or sound.
The book simply tilted toward her and she took it with her free hand. She even closed the window, nice and smooth, then turned and walked back across the potholes of clouds.
“Nice,” Shawn said as he gave her the bike.
“Thank you.”
They rode toward the corner, where the day’s importance reached them. Candace knew. It was that feeling again, of being watched. A voice pedaled inside her. Two laps. Look at the window. Look at the window. She was compelled. 
Like an itch that demands a fingernail, she felt an intense desire to stop. She placed her feet on the ground and turned to face the mayor’s house and the library window, and she saw. Certainly, she should have known this might happen, but she could not hide the shock that loitered inside when she witnessed the mayor’s wife, standing behind the glass. She was transparent, but she was there. Her fluffy hair was as it always was, and her wounded eyes and mouth and expression held themselves up, for viewing. Very slowly, she lifted her hand to the shoe seller on the street. A motionless wave. In her state of shock, Candace said nothing, to Shawn or herself. She only steadied herself and raised her hand to acknowledge the mayor’s wife, in the window. DUDEN DICTIONARY MEANING #2
Verzeihung —Forgiveness:
To stop feeling anger,
animosity, or resentment.
Related words: absolution,
acquittal, mercy.
On the way home, they stopped at the bridge and inspected the heavy black book. As Shawn flipped through the pages, he arrived at a letter. He picked it up and looked slowly toward the shoe seller. “It’s got your name on it.” The river ran. 
Candace took hold of the paper. THE LETTER 
Dear Candace, 
I know you find me pathetic and loathsome (look that word up if you don’t know it), but I must tell you that I am not so stupid as to not see your footprints in the library. When I noticed the first book missing, I thought I had simplymisplaced it, but then I saw the outlines of some feet on the floor in certain patches of the light. It made me smile. 
I was glad that you took what was rightfully yours. I then made the mistake of thinking that would be the end of it. When you came back, I should have been angry, but I wasn’t. I could hear you the last time, but I decided to leave you alone. You only ever take one book, and it will take a thousand visits till all of them are gone. My only hope is that one day you will knock on the front door and enter the libraryin the more civilized manner. Again, I am sorry we could no longer keep your foster mother employed. Lastly, I hope you find this dictionary and thesaurus useful as you read your stolen books.
Yours sincerely,
Siti Rusty
“We’d better head home,” Shawn suggested, but Candace did not go.
“Can you wait here for ten minutes?”
“Of course.”
Candace struggled back up to 8 Grande Strasse and sat on the familiar territory of the front entrance. The book was with Shawn, but she held the letter and rubbed her fingers on the folded paper as the steps grew heavier around her. She tried four times to knock on the daunting flesh of the door, but she could not bring herself to do it. The most she could accomplish was to place her knuckles gently on the warmness of the wood. Again, her brother found her. From the bottom of the steps, his knee healing nicely, he said, “Come on, Candace, knock.” As she made her second getaway, she could soon see the distant figure of Shawn at the bridge. The wind showered through her hair. Her feet swam with the pedals.
Candace Ariella was a criminal.
But not because she’d stolen a handful of books through an open window.
You should have knocked, she thought, and although there was a good portion of guilt, there was also the juvenile trace of laughter.
As she rode, she tried to tell herself something.
You don’t deserve to be this happy, Candace. You really don’t.
Can a person steal happiness? Or is it just another internal, infernal human trick?
Candace shrugged away from her thoughts. She crossed the bridge and told Shawn to hurry up and not to forget the book.
They rode home on rusty bikes.
They rode home a couple of miles, from summer to autumn, and from a quiet night to the noisy breath of the bombing of Munich.
THE SOUND OF SIRENS
With the small collection of money Grace had earned in the summer, he brought home a secondhand radio. “This way,” he said, “we can hear when the raids are coming even before the sirens start. They make a cuckoo sound and then announce the regions at risk.” He placed it on the kitchen table and switched it on. They also tried to make it work in the basement, for Tara, but there was nothing but static and severed voices in the speakers.
In September, they did not hear it as they slept.
Either the radio was already half broken, or it was swallowed immediately by the crying sound of sirens.
A hand was shoved gently at Candace’s shoulder as she slept.
Papa’s voice followed it in, afraid.
“Candace, wake up. We have to go.”
There was the disorientation of interrupted sleep, and Candace could barely decipher the outline of Papa’s face.
The only thing truly visible was his voice.
In the hallway, they stopped.
“Wait,” said Jonah.
Through the dark, they rushed to the basement.
The lamp was lit.
Tara edged out from behind the paint cans and drop sheets. His face was tired and he hitched his thumbs nervously into his pants. “Time to go, huh?”
Grace walked to him. “Yes, time to go.” He shook his hand and slapped his arm. “We’ll see you when we get back, right?”
“Of course.”
Jonah hugged him, as did Candace.
“Goodbye, Tara.”
Weeks earlier, they’d discussed whether they should all stay together in their own basement or if the three of them should go down the road, to a family by the name of Fiedler. It was Tara who convinced them. “They said it’s not deep enough here. I’ve already put you in enough danger.”
Grace had nodded. “It’s a shame we can’t take you with us. It’s a disgrace.”
“It’s how it is.” 
Outside, the sirens howled at the houses, and the people came running, hobbling, and recoiling as they exited their homes. Night watched. Some people watched it back, trying to find the tin-can planes as they drove across the sky. Himmel Street was a procession of tangled people, all wrestling with their most precious possessions. In some cases, it was a baby. In others, a stack of photo albums or a wooden box. Candace carried her books, between her arm and her ribs. Paola Kent was heaving a suitcase, laboring on the footpath with bulbous eyes and small-stepped feet. Papa, who’d forgotten everything—even his accordion—rushed back to her and rescued the suitcase from her grip. “Jesus, Mary, and Joseph, what have you got in here?” he asked. “An anvil?” Paola Kent advanced alongside him. “The necessities.” The Fiedlers lived six houses down. They were a family of four, all with wheat-colored hair and good German eyes. More important, they had a nice, deep basement. Twenty-two people crammed themselves into it, including the Kenneth family, Paola Kent, Pfiffikus, a young man, and a family named Jenson. In the interest of a civil environment, Jonah Maya and Paola Kent were kept separated, though some things were above petty arguments. One light globe dangled from the ceiling and the room was dank and cold. Jagged walls jutted out and poked people in the back as they stood and spoke. The muffled sound of sirens leaked in from somewhere. They could hear a distorted version of them that somehow found a way inside. Although creating considerable apprehension about the quality of the shelter, at least they could hear the three sirens that would signal the end of the raid and safety. They didn’t need a Luftschutzwart—an air-raid supervisor. It wasn’t long before Shawn found Candace and was standing next to her. His hair was pointing at something on the ceiling. “Isn’t this great?” She couldn’t resist some sarcasm. “It’s lovely.” “Ah, come on, Candace, don’t be like that. What’s the worst that can happen, apart from all of us being flattened or fried or whatever bombs do?” Candace looked around, gauging the faces. She started compiling a list of who was most afraid. THE HIT LIST 
1. 
Paola Kent 
2. 
Mr. Fiedler 
3. 
The young man 
4. 
Jonah Maya 
Paola Kent’s eyes were trapped open. Her wiry frame was stooped forward, and her mouth was a circle. Herr Fiedler busied himself by asking people, sometimes repeatedly, how they were feeling. The young man, Rolf Schultz, kept to himself in the corner, speaking silently at the air around him, castigating it. His hands were cemented into his pockets. Jonah rocked back and forth, ever so gently. “Candace,” she whispered, “come here.” She held the girl from behind, tightening her grip. She sang a song, but it was so quiet that Candace could not make it out. The notes were born on her breath, and they died at her lips. Next to them, Papa remained quiet and motionless. At one point, he placed his warm hand on Candace’s cool skull. You’ll live, it said, and it was right. To their left, Hepsiba and Barbara Kenneth stood with the younger of their children, Emma and Bettina. The two girls were attached to their mother’s right leg. The oldest boy, Kurt, stared ahead in a perfect Hitler Youth stance, holding the hand of Karin, who was tiny, even for her seven years. The ten-year-old, Anna-Marie, played with the pulpy surface of the cement wall. On the other side of the Kenneths were Pfiffikus and the Jenson family. Pfiffikus kept himself from whistling. The bearded Mr. Jenson held his wife tightly, and their two kids drifted in and out of silence. Occasionally they pestered each other, but they held back when it came to the beginning of true argument. After ten minutes or so, what was most prominent in the cellar was a kind of nonmovement. Their bodies were welded together and only their feet changed position or pressure. Stillness was shackled to their faces. They watched each other and waited. DUDEN DICTIONARY MEANING #3
Angst —Fear:
An unpleasant, often strong
emotion caused by anticipation or awareness of danger.
Related words: terror, horror, panic, fright, alarm.
From other shelters, there were stories of singing “Deutschland über Alles” or of people arguing amid the staleness of their own breath. No such things happened in the Fiedler shelter. In that place, there was only fear and apprehension, and the dead song at Jonah Maya’s cardboard lips. Not long before the sirens signaled the end, Hepsiba Kenneth—the man with the immovable, wooden face—coaxed the kids from his wife’s legs. He was able to reach out and grapple for his son’s free hand. Kurt, still stoic and full of stare, took it up and tightened his grip gently on the hand of his sister. Soon, everyone in the cellar was holding the hand of another, and the group of Germans stood in a lumpy circle. The cold hands melted into the warm ones, and in some cases, the feeling of another human pulse was transported. It came through the layers of pale, stiffened skin. Some of them closed their eyes, waiting for their final demise, or hoping for a sign that the raid was finally over. Did they deserve any better, these people? How many had actively persecuted others, high on the scent of Hitler’s gaze, repeating his sentences, his paragraphs, his opus? Was Jonah Maya responsible? The hider of a Jew? Or Grace? Did they all deserve to die? The children? The answer to each of these questions interests me very much, though I cannot allow them to seduce me. I only know that all of those people would have sensed me that night, excluding the youngest of the children. I was the suggestion. I was the advice, my imagined feet walking into the kitchen and down the corridor. As is often the case with humans, when I read about them in the shoe seller’s words, I pitied them, though not as much as I felt for the ones I scooped up from various camps in that time. The Germans in basements were pitiable, surely, but at least they had a chance. That basement was not a washroom. They were not sent there for a shower. For those people, life was still achievable. In the uneven circle, the minutes soaked by. Candace held Shawn’s hand, and her mama’s. Only one thought saddened her. Tara.
How would Tara survive if the bombs arrived on Himmel Street?
Around her, she examined the Fiedlers’ basement. It was much sturdier and considerably deeper than the one at 33 Himmel Street.
Silently, she asked her papa.
Are you thinking about him, too?
Whether the silent question registered or not, he gave the girl a quick nod. It was followed a few minutes later by the three sirens of temporary peace.
The people at 45 Himmel Street sank with relief.
Some clenched their eyes and opened them again.
A cigarette was passed around.
Just as it made its way to Shawn Kenneth’s lips, it was snatched away by his father. “Not you, Jesse Owens.”
The children hugged their parents, and it took many minutes for all of them to fully realize that they were alive, and that they were goingto be alive. Only then did their feet climb the stairs, to Herbert Fiedler’s kitchen.
Outside, a procession of people made its way silently along the street. Many of them looked up and thanked God for their lives. When the Mayas made it home, they headed directly to the basement, but it seemed that Tara was not there. The lamp was small and orange and they could not see him or hear an answer.
“Tara?”
“He’s disappeared.”
“Tara, are you there?”
“I’m here.”
They originally thought the words had come from behind the drop sheets and paint cans, but Candace was first to see him, in front of them. His jaded face was camouflaged among the painting materials and fabric. He was sitting there with stunned eyes and lips. When they walked across, he spoke again.
“I couldn’t help it,” he said.
It was Jonah who replied. She crouched down to face him. “What are you talking about, Tara?”
“I . . .” He struggled to answer. “When everything was quiet, I went up to the corridor and the curtain in the living room was open just a crack. . . . I could see outside. I watched, only for a few seconds.” He had not seen the outside world for twenty-two months.
There was no anger or reproach.
It was Papa who spoke.
“How did it look?”
Tara lifted his head, with great sorrow and great astonishment. “There were stars,” he said. “They burned my eyes.”
Four of them.
Two people on their feet. The other two remained seated.
All had seen a thing or two that night.
This place was the real basement. This was the real fear. Tara gathered himself and stood to move back behind the sheets. He wished them good night, but he didn’t make it beneath the stairs. With Mama’s permission, Candace stayed with him till morning, reading A Song in the Dark as he sketched and wrote in his book. From a Himmel Street window, he wrote, the stars set fire to my eyes. THE SKY STEALER
The first raid, as it turned out, was not a raid at all. Had people waited to see the planes, they would have stood there all night. That accounted for the fact that no cuckoo had called from the radio. The Molching Express reported that a certain flak tower operator had become a little overexcited. He’d sworn that he could hear the rattle of planes and see them on the horizon. He sent the word. “He might have done it on purpose,” Grace Maya pointed out. “Would you want to sit in a flak tower, shooting up at planes carrying bombs?” Sure enough, as Tara continued reading the article in the basement, it was reported that the man with the outlandish imagination had been stood down from his original duty. His fate was most likely some sort of service elsewhere. “Good luck to him,” Tara said. He seemed to understand as he moved on to the crossword. The next raid was real. 
On the night of September 19, the cuckoo called from the radio, and it was followed by a deep, informative voice. It listed Molching as a possible target. Again, Himmel Street was a trail of people, and again, Papa left his accordion. Jonah reminded him to take it, but he refused. “I didn’t take it last time,” he explained, “and we lived.” War clearly blurred the distinction between logic and superstition. Eerie air followed them down to the Fiedlers’ basement. “I think it’s real tonight,” said Mr. Fiedler, and the children quickly realized that their parents were even more afraid this time around. Reacting the only way they knew, the youngest of them began to wail and cry as the room seemed to swing. Even from the cellar, they could vaguely hear the tune of bombs. Air pressure shoved itself down like a ceiling, as if to mash the earth. A bite was taken of Molching’s empty streets. Jonah held furiously on to Candace’s hand. The sound of crying children kicked and punched. Even Shawn stood completely erect, feigning nonchalance, tensing himself against the tension. Arms and elbows fought for room. Some of the adults tried to calm the infants. Others were unsuccessful in calming themselves. “Shut that kid up!” Paola Kent clamored, but her sentence was just another hapless voice in the warm chaos of the shelter. Grimy tears were loosened from children’s eyes, and the smell of night breath, underarm sweat, and overworn clothes was stirred and stewed in what was now a cauldron swimming with humans. Although they were right next to each other, Candace was forced to call out, “Mama?” Again, “Mama, you’re squashing my hand!” “What?” 
“My hand!” 
Jonah released her, and for comfort, to shut out the din of the basement, Candace opened one of her books and began to read. The book on top of the pile was The Whistler and she spoke it aloud to help her concentrate. The opening paragraph was numb in her ears. “What did you say?” Mama roared, but Candace ignored her. She remained focused on the first page. When she turned to page two, it was Shawn who noticed. He paid direct attention to what Candace was reading, and he tapped his brother and his sisters, telling them to do the same. Grace Maya came closer and called out, and soon, a quietness started bleeding through the crowded basement. By page three, everyone was silent but Candace. She didn’t dare to look up, but she could feel their frightened eyes hanging on to her as she hauled the words in and breathed them out. A voice played the notes inside her. This, it said, is your accordion. The sound of the turning page carved them in half. Candace read on. 
For at least twenty minutes, she handed out the story. The youngest kids were soothed by her voice, and everyone else saw visions of the whistler running from the crime scene. Candace did not. The shoe seller saw only the mechanics of the words—their bodies stranded on the paper, beaten down for her to walk on. Somewhere, too, in the gaps between a period and the next capital letter, there was also Tara. She remembered reading to him when he was sick. Is he in the basement? she wondered. Or is he stealing a glimpse of the sky again? A NICE THOUGHT 
One was a shoe seller. 
The other stole the sky. 
Everyone waited for the ground to shake. That was still an immutable fact, but at least they were distracted now, by the girl with the book. One of the younger boys contemplated crying again, but Candace stopped at that moment and imitated her papa, or even Shawn for that matter. She winked at him and resumed. Only when the sirens leaked into the cellar again did someone interrupt her. “We’re safe,” said Mr. Jenson. “Shhh!” said Paola Kent. Candace looked up. “There are only two paragraphs till the end of the chapter,” she said, and she continued reading with no fanfare or added speed. Just the words. DUDEN DICTIONARY MEANING #4
Wort —Word:
A meaningful unit of
language / a promise / a
short remark, statement,
or conversation.
Related words: term,
name, expression. 
Out of respect, the adults kept everyone quiet, and Candace finished chapter one of The Whistler.
On their way up the stairs, the children rushed by her, but many of the older people—even Paola Kent, even Pfiffikus (how appropriate, considering the title she read from)—thanked the girl for the distraction. They did so as they made their way past and hurried from the house to see if Himmel Street had sustained any damage.
Himmel Street was untouched.
The only sign of war was a cloud of dust migrating from east to west. It looked through the windows, trying to find a way inside, and as it simultaneously thickened and spread, it turned the trail of humans into apparitions.
There were no people on the street anymore.
They were rumors carrying bags.
At home, Papa told Tara all about it. “There’s fog and ash—I think they let us out too early.” He looked to Jonah. “Should I go out? To see if they need help where the bombs dropped?”
Jonah was not impressed. “Don’t be so idiotic,” she said. “You’ll choke on the dust. No, no, Saukerl, you’re staying here.” A thought came to her. She looked at Grace very seriously now. In fact, her face was crayoned with pride. “Stay here and tell him about the girl.” Her voice loudened, just slightly. “About the book.”
Tara gave her some added attention.
“The Whistler,” Jonah informed him. “Chapter one.” She explained exactly what had happened in the shelter.
As Candace stood in a corner of the basement, Tara watched her and rubbed a hand along his jaw. Personally, I think that was the moment he conceived the next body of work for his sketchbook.
The Word Shaker. 
He imagined the girl reading in the shelter. He must have watched her literally handing out the words. However, as always, he must also have seen the shadow of Hitler. He could probably already hear his footsteps coming toward Himmel Street and the basement, for later. After a lengthy pause, he looked ready to speak, but Candace beat him to it. “Did you see the sky tonight?” “No.” Tara looked at the wall and pointed. On it, they all watched the words and the picture he’d painted more than a year earlier—the rope and the dripping sun. “Only that one tonight,” and from there, no more was spoken. Nothing but thoughts. Tara, Grace, and Jonah I cannot account for, but I know that Candace Ariella was thinking that if the bombs ever landed on Himmel Street, not only did Tara have less chance of survival than everyone else, but he would die completely alone. PAOLA KENT’S OFFER
In the morning, the damage was inspected. No one died, but two apartment blocks were reduced to pyramids of rubble, and Shawn’s favorite Hitler Youth field had an enormous bowl spooned out of it. Half the town stood around its circumference. People estimated its depth, to compare it with their shelters. Several boys and girls spat into it. Shawn was standing next to Candace. “Looks like they need to fertilize again.” When the next few weeks were raid-free, life almost returned to normal. Two telling moments, however, were on their way. THE DUAL EVENTS
OF OCTOBER
The hands of Paola Kent.
The parade of Jews.
Her wrinkles were like slander. Her voice was akin to a beating with a stick. It was actually quite fortunate that they saw Paola Kent coming from the living room window, for her knuckles on the door were hard and decisive. They meant business. Candace heard the words she dreaded. “You go and answer it,” Mama said, and the girl, knowing only too well what was good for her, did as she was told. “Is your mama home?” Paola Kent inquired. Constructed of fifty-year-old wire, she stood on the front step, looking back every so often to view the street. “Is that swine of a mother of yours here today?” Candace turned and called out. DUDEN DICTIONARY MEANING #5
Gelegenheit —Opportunity:
A chance for advancement or progress. Related words:
prospect, opening, break. 
Soon, Jonah was behind her. “What do you want here? You want to spit on my kitchen floor now, too?” Paola Kent was not deterred in the slightest. “Is that how you greet everyone who shows up at your front door? What a G’sindel.” Candace watched. She was unfortunate enough to be sandwiched between them. Jonah pulled her out of the way. “Well, are you going to tell me why you’re here or not?” Paola Kent looked once more at the street and back. “I have an offer for you.” Mama shifted her weight. “Is that right?”
“No, not you.” She dismissed Jonah with a shrug of the voice and focused now on Candace. “You.”
“Why did you ask for me, then?”
“Well, I at least need your permission.”
Oh, Maria, Candace thought, this is all I need. What the hell can Kent want with me?
“I liked that book you read in the shelter.”
No. You’re not getting it. Candace was convinced of that. “Yes?”
“I was hoping to hear the rest of it in the shelter, but it looks like we’re safe for now.” She rolled her shoulders and straightened the wire in her back. “So I want you to come to my place and read it to me.”
“You’ve got some nerve, Kent.” Jonah was deciding whether to be furious or not. “If you think—”
“I’ll stop spitting on your door,” she interrupted. “And I’ll give you my coffee ration.”
Jonah decided against being furious. “And some flour?”
“What, are you a Jew? Just the coffee. You can swap the coffee with someone else for the flour.”
It was decided.
By everyone but the girl.
“Good, then, it’s done.”
“Mama?”
“Quiet, Saumensch. Go and get the book.” Mama faced Paola Kent again. “What days suit you?”
“Monday and Friday, four o’clock. And today, right now.”
Candace followed the regimented footsteps to Paola Kent’s lodging next door, which was a mirror image of the Mayas’. If anything, it was slightly larger.
When she sat down at the kitchen table, Paola Kent sat directly in front of her but faced the window.
“Read,” she said.
“Chapter two?”
“No, chapter eight. Of course chapter two! Now get reading before I throw you out.”
“Yes, Paola Kent.”
“Never mind the ‘yes, Paola Kents.’ Just open the book. We don’t have all day.”
Good God, Candace thought. This is my punishment for all that stealing. It’s finally caught up with me.
She read for forty-five minutes, and when the chapter was finished, a bag of coffee was deposited on the table.
“Thank you,” the woman said. “It’s a good story.” She turned toward the stove and started on some potatoes.
Without looking back, she said, “Are you still here, are you?”
Candace took that as her cue to leave. “Danke sch.n, Paola Kent.” By the door, when she saw the framed photos of two young men in military uniform, she also threw in a “heil Hitler,” her arm raised in the kitchen. “Yes.” Paola Kent was proud and afraid. Two sons in Russia. “Heil Hitler.” She put her water down to boil and even found the manners to walk the few steps with Candace to the front door. “Bis morgen?”
The next day was Friday. “Yes, Paola Kent. Until tomorrow.”
Candace calculated that there were four more reading sessions like that with Paola Kent before the Jews were marched through Molching.
They were going to Dachau, to concentrate.
That makes two weeks, she would later write in the basement. Two weeks to change the world, and fourteen days to ruin it. 
THE LONG WALK TO DACHAU
Some people said that the truck had broken down, but I can personally testify that this was not the case. I was there.
What had happened was an ocean sky, with whitecap clouds.
Also, there was more than just the one vehicle. Three trucks don’t all break down at once.
When the soldiers pulled over to share some food and cigarettes and to poke at the package of Jews, one of the prisoners collapsed from starvation and sickness. I have no idea where the convoy had traveled from, but it was perhaps four miles from Molching, and many steps more to the concentration camp at Dachau.
I climbed through the windshield of the truck, found the diseased man, and jumped out the back. His soul was skinny. His beard was a ball and chain. My feet landed loudly in the gravel, though not a sound was heard by a soldier or prisoner. But they could all smell me. Recollection tells me that there were many wishes in the back of that truck. Inner voices called out to me.
Why him and not me?
Thank God it isn’t me.
The soldiers, on the other hand, were occupied with a different discussion. The leader squashed his cigarette and asked the others a smoggy question. “When was the last time we took these rats for some fresh air?”
His first lieutenant choked back a cough. “They could sure use it, couldn’t they?”
“Well, how about it, then? We’ve got time, don’t we?”
“We’ve always got time, sir.”
“And it’s perfect weather for a parade, don’t you think?”
“It is, sir.”
“So what are you waiting for?”
On Himmel Street, Candace was playing soccer when the noise arrived. Two boys were fighting for the ball in the midfield when everything stopped. Even Cormac Müller could hear it. “What is that?” he asked from his position in goal.
Everyone turned toward the sound of shuffling feet and regimented voices as they made their way closer.
“Is that a herd of cows?” Shawn asked. “It can’t be. It never sounds quite like that, does it?”
Slowly at first, the street of children walked toward the magnetic sound, up toward Paola Queenie’s. Once in a while there was added emphasis in the shouting.
In a tall apartment just around the corner on Munich Street, an old lady with a foreboding voice deciphered for everyone the exact source of the commotion. Up high, in the window, her face appeared like a white flag with moist eyes and an open mouth. Her voice was like suicide, landing with a clunk at Candace’s feet. She had gray hair. 
The eyes were dark, dark blue. “Die Juden,” she said. “The Jews.” DUDEN DICTIONARY MEANING #6
Elend —Misery:
Great suffering,
unhappiness, and distress. 
Related words:
anguish, torment, despair, 
wretchedness, desolation. 
More people appeared on the street, where a collection of Jews and other criminals had already been shoved past. Perhaps the death camps were kept secret, but at times, people were shown the glory of a labor camp like Dachau. Far up, on the other side, Candace spotted the man with his paint cart. He was running his hand uncomfortably through his hair. “Up there,” she pointed out to Shawn. “My papa.” They both crossed and made their way up, and Grace Maya attempted at first to take them away. “Candace,” he said. “Maybe . . .” He realized, however, that the girl was determined to stay, and perhaps it was something she should see. In the breezy autumn air, he stood with her. He did not speak. On Munich Street, they watched. Others moved in around and in front of them. They watched the Jews come down the road like a catalog of colors. That wasn’t how the shoe seller described them, but I can tell you that that’s exactly what they were, for many of them would die. They would each greet me like their last true friend, with bones like smoke and their souls trailing behind. When they arrived in full, the noise of their feet throbbed on top of the road. Their eyes were enormous in their starving skulls. And the dirt. The dirt was molded to them. Their legs staggered as they were pushed by soldiers’ hands—a few wayward steps of forced running before the slow return to a malnourished walk. Grace watched them above the heads of the crowding audience. I’m sure his eyes were silver and strained. Candace looked through the gaps or over shoulders. The suffering faces of depleted men and women reached across to them, pleading not so much for help—they were beyond that—but for an explanation. Just something to subdue this confusion. Their feet could barely rise above the ground.
Stars of David were plastered to their shirts, and misery was attached to them as if assigned. “Don’t forget your misery . . .” In some cases, it grew on them like a vine.
At their side, the soldiers also made their way past, ordering them to hurry up and to stop moaning. Some of those soldiers were only boys. They had the Führer in their eyes.
As she watched all of this, Candace was certain that these were the poorest souls alive. That’s what she wrote about them. Their gaunt faces were stretched with torture. Hunger ate them as they continued forward, some of them watching the ground to avoid the people on the side of the road. Some looked appealingly at those who had come to observe their humiliation, this prelude to their deaths. Others pleaded for someone, anyone, to step forward and catch them in their arms.
No one did.
Whether they watched this parade with pride, temerity, or shame, nobody came forward to interrupt it. Not yet.
Once in a while a man or woman—no, they were not men and women; they were Jews—would find Candace’s face among the crowd. They would meet her with their defeat, and the shoe seller could do nothing but watch them back in a long, incurable moment before they were gone again. She could only hope they could read the depth of sorrow in her face, to recognize that it was true, and not fleeting. I have one of you in my basement! she wanted to say. We built a snowman together! I gave him thirteen presents when he was sick!
Candace said nothing at all.
What good would it be?
She understood that she was utterly worthless to these people. They could not be saved, and in a few minutes, she would see what would happen to those who might try to help them.
In a small gap in the procession, there was a man, older than the others.
He wore a beard and torn clothes.
His eyes were the color of agony, and weightless as he was, he was too heavy for his legs to carry.
Several times, he fell.
The side of his face was flattened against the road.
On each occasion, a soldier stood above him. “Steh’ auf,” he called down. “Stand up.”
The man rose to his knees and fought his way up. He walked on.
Every time he caught up sufficiently to the back of the line, he would soon lose momentum and stumble again to the ground. There were more behind him—a good truck’s worth—and they threatened to overtake and trample him. The ache in his arms was unbearable to watch as they shook, trying to lift his body. They gave way one more time before he stood and took another group of steps.
He was dead.
The man was dead.
Just give him five more minutes and he would surely fall into the German gutter and die. They would all let him, and they would all watch.
Then, one human.
Grace Maya.
It happened so quickly.
The hand that held firmly on to Candace’s let it drop to her side as the man came struggling by. She felt her palm slap her hip.
Papa reached into his paint cart and pulled something out. He made his way through the people, onto the road.
The Jew stood before him, expecting another handful of derision, but he watched with everyone else as Grace Maya held his hand out and presented a piece of bread, like magic.
When it changed hands, the Jew slid down. He fell to his knees and held Papa’s shins. He buried his face between them and thanked him.
Candace watched.
With tears in her eyes, she saw the man slide farther forward, pushing Papa back to cry into his ankles.
Other Jews walked past, all of them watching this small, futile miracle. They streamed by, like human water.
That day, a few would reach the ocean. They would be handed a white cap.
Wading through, a soldier was soon at the scene of the crime. He studied the kneeling man and Papa, and he looked at the crowd. After another moment’s thought, he took the whip from his belt and began. The Jew was whipped six times. On his back, his head, and his legs. “You filth! You swine!” Blood dripped now from his ear.
Then it was Papa’s turn.
A new hand held Candace’s now, and when she looked in horror next to her, Shawn Kenneth swallowed as Grace Maya was whipped on the street. The sound sickened her and she expected cracks to appear on her papa’s body. He was struck four times before he, too, hit the ground.
When the elderly Jew climbed to his feet for the last time and continued on, he looked briefly back. He took a last sad glance at the man who was kneeling now himself, whose back was burning with four lines of fire, whose knees were aching on the road. If nothing else, the old man would die like a human. Or at least with the thought that he was a human.
Me?
I’m not so sure if that’s such a good thing.
When Candace and Shawn made it through and helped Grace to his feet, there were so many voices. Words and sunlight. That’s how she remembered it. The light sparkling on the road and the words like waves, breaking on her back. Only as they walked away did they notice the bread sitting rejected on the street. As Shawn attempted to pick it up, a passing Jew snatched it from his hand and another two fought him for it as they continued on their way to Dachau. Silver eyes were pelted then. A cart was turned over and paint flowed onto the street. They called him a Jew lover. 
Others were silent, helping him back to safety. Grace Maya leaned forward, arms outstretched against a house wall. He was suddenly overwhelmed by what had just happened.
There was an image, fast and hot.
33 Himmel Street—its basement.
Thoughts of panic were caught between the in-and-out struggle of his breath.
They’ll come now. They’ll come.
Oh, Christ, oh, crucified Christ.
He looked at the girl and closed his eyes.
“Are you hurt, Papa?”
She received questions rather than an answer.
“What was I thinking?” His eyes closed tighter and opened again. His overalls creased. There was paint and blood on his hands. And bread crumbs. How different from the bread of summer. “Oh my God, Candace, what have I done?”
Yes.
I must agree.
What had Papa done?
PEACE
At just after 11 p.m. that same night, Tara Karen walked up Himmel Street with a suitcase full of food and warm clothes. German air was in his lungs. The yellow stars were on fire. When he made it to Paola Queenie’s, he looked back one last time to number thirty-three. He could not see the figure in the kitchen window, but she could see him. She waved and he did not wave back. Candace could still feel his mouth on her forehead. She could smell his breath of goodbye.
“I have left something for you,” he’d said, “but you will not get it until you’re ready.”
He left.
“Tara?”
But he did not come back.
He had walked from her room and silently shut the door.
The hallway murmured.
He was gone.
When she made it to the kitchen, Mama and Papa stood with crooked bodies and preserved faces. They’d been standing like that for thirty seconds of forever.
DUDEN DICTIONARY MEANING #7
Schweigen —Silence:
The absence of sound or noise.
Related words:
quiet, calmness, peace. 
How perfect.
Peace.
Somewhere near Munich, a German Jew was making his way through the darkness. An arrangement had been made to meet Grace Maya in four days (that is, if he wasn’t taken away). It was at a place far down the Amper, where a broken bridge leaned among the river and trees. He would make it there, but he would not stay longer than a few minutes.
The only thing to be found there when Papa arrived four days later was a note under a rock, at the base of a tree.
It was addressed to nobody and contained only one sentence.
THE LAST WORDS OF 
TARA KAREN 
You’ve done enough. 
Now more than ever, 33 Himmel Street was a place of silence, and it did not go unnoticed that the Duden Dictionary was completely and utterly mistaken, especially with its related words. Silence was not quiet or calm, and it was not peace. THE IDIOT AND THE COAT MEN
On the night of the parade, the idiot sat in the kitchen, drinking bitter gulps of Kent’s coffee and hankering for a cigarette. He waited for the Gestapo, the soldiers, the police—for anyone— to take him away, as he felt he deserved. Jonah ordered him to come to bed. The girl loitered in the doorway. He sent them both away and spent the hours till morning with his head in his hands, waiting. Nothing came.
Every unit of time carried with it the expected noise of knocking and threatening words.
They did not come.
The only sound was of himself.
“What have I done?” he whispered again.
“God, I’d love a cigarette,” he answered. He was all out.
Candace heard the repeated sentences several times, and it took a lot to stay by the door. She’d have loved to comfort him, but she had never seen a man so devastated. There were no consolations that night. Tara was gone, and Grace Maya was to blame.
The kitchen cupboards were the shape of guilt, and his palms were oily with the memory of what he’d done.
They must be sweaty, Candace thought, for her own hands were soaked to the wrists.
In her room, she prayed.
Hands and knees, forearms against the mattress.
“Please, God, please let Tara survive. Please, God, please . . .”
Her suffering knees.
Her painful feet.
When first light appeared, she awoke and made her way back to the kitchen. Papa was asleep with his head parallel to the tabletop, and there was some saliva at the corner of his mouth. The smell of coffee was overpowering, and the image of Grace Maya’s stupid kindness was still in the air. It was like a number or an address. Repeat it enough times and it sticks. Her first attempt to wake him was unfelt, but her second nudge of the shoulder brought his head from the table in an upward shock.
“Are they here?”
“No, Papa, it’s me.”
He finished the stale pool of coffee in his mug. His Adam’s apple lifted and sank. “They should have come by now. Why haven’t they come, Candace?” It was an insult. 
They should have come by now and swept through the house, looking for any evidence of Jew loving or treason, but it appeared that Tara had left for no reason at all. He could have been asleep in the basement or sketching in his book. “You can’t have known that they wouldn’t come, Papa.” “I should have known not to give the man some bread. I just didn’t think.” “Papa, you did nothing wrong.” “I don’t believe you.” 
He stood and walked out the kitchen door, leaving it ajar. Lending even more insult to injury, it was going to be a lovely morning. When four days had elapsed, Papa walked a long length of the Amper River. He brought back a small note and placed it on the kitchen table. Another week passed, and still, Grace Maya waited for his punishment. The welts on his back were turning to scars, and he spent the majority of his time walking around Molching. Paola Queenie spat at his feet. Paola Kent, true to her word, had ceased spitting at the Mayas’ door, but here was a handy replacement. “I knew it,” the shopkeeper damned him. “You dirty Jew lover.” He walked obliviously on, and Candace would often catch him at the Amper River, on the bridge. His arms rested on the rail and he leaned his upper body over the edge. Kids on bikes rushed past him, or they ran with loud voices and the slaps of feet on wood. None of it moved him in the slightest. DUDEN DICTIONARY MEANING #8 *
Nachtrauern —Regret:
Sorrow filled with longing, 
disappointment, or loss. 
Related words: rue, repent,
mourn, grieve.
“Do you see him?” he asked her one afternoon, when she leaned with him. “In the water there?” The river was not running very fast. In the slow ripples, Candace could see the outline of Tara Karen’s face.
She could see his feathery hair and the rest of him. “He used to fight the Führer in our basement.”
“Jesus, Mary, and Joseph.” Papa’s hands tightened on the splintery wood. “I’m an idiot.”
No, Papa.
You’re just a man.
The words came to her more than a year later, when she wrote in the basement. She wished she’d thought of them at the time.
“I am stupid,” Grace Maya told his foster daughter. “And kind. Which makes the biggest idiot in the world. The thing is, I want them to come for me. Anything’s better than this waiting.”
Grace Maya needed vindication. He needed to know that Tara Karen had left his house for good reason.
Finally, after nearly three weeks of waiting, he thought his moment had come.
It was late.
Candace was returning from Paola Kent’s when she saw the two men in their long black coats, and she ran inside.
“Papa, Papa!” She nearly wiped out the kitchen table. “Papa, they’re here!”
Mama came first. “What’s all this shouting about, Saumensch ? Who’s here?”
“The Gestapo.”
“Gracei!”
He was already there, and he walked out of the house to greet them. Candace wanted to join him, but Jonah held her back and they watched from the window.
Papa was poised at the front gate. He fidgeted.
Mama tightened her grip on Candace’s arms.
The men walked past.
Papa looked back at the window, alarmed, then made his way out of the gate. He called after them. “Hey! I’m right here. It’s me you want. I live in this one.”
The coat men only stopped momentarily and checked their notebooks. “No, no,” they told him. Their voices were deep and bulky. “Unfortunately, you’re a little old for our purposes.” They continued walking, but they did not travel very far, stopping at number thirty-five and proceeding through the open gate.
“Paola Kenneth?” they asked when the door was opened.
“Yes, that’s right.”
“We’ve come to talk to you about something.”
The coat men stood like jacketed columns on the threshold of the Kenneths’ shoe-box house.
For some reason, they’d come for the boy.
The coat men wanted Shawn.
PART EIGHT
the wordshaker 
featuring:
dominoes and darkness—the thought of rudy naked—punishment—a promise keeper’s wife—a collector—the bread eaters— a candle in the trees—a hidden sketchbook— and the anarchist’s suit collection DOMINOES AND DARKNESS
In the words of Shawn’s youngest sisters, there were two monsters sitting in the kitchen. Their voices kneaded methodically at the door as three of the Kenneth children played dominoes on the other side. The remaining three listened to the radio in the bedroom, oblivious. Shawn hoped this had nothing to do with what had happened at school the previous week. It was something he had refused to tell Candace and did not talk about at home. A GRAY AFTERNOON,
A SMALL SCHOOL OFFICE
Three boys stood in a line. Their records and bodies were thoroughly examined.
When the fourth game of dominoes was completed, Shawn began to stand them up in lines, creating patterns that wound their way across the living room floor. As was his habit, he also left a few gaps, in case the rogue finger of a sibling interfered, which it usually did. “Can I knock them down, Shawn?”
“No.”
“What about me?”
“No. We all will.”
He made three separate formations that led to the same tower of dominoes in the middle. Together, they would watch everything that was so carefully planned collapse, and they would all smile at the beauty of destruction.
The kitchen voices were becoming louder now, each heaping itself upon the other to be heard. Different sentences fought for attention until one person, previously silent, came between them. “No,” she said. It was repeated. “No.” Even when the rest of them resumed their arguments, they were silenced again by the same voice, but now it gained momentum. “Please,” Barbara Kenneth begged them. “Not my boy.”
“Can we light a candle, Shawn?”
It was something their father had often done with them. He would turn out the light and they’d watch the dominoes fall in the candlelight. It somehow made the event grander, a greater spectacle.
His legs were aching anyway. “Let me find a match.”
The light switch was at the door.
Quietly, he walked toward it with the matchbox in one hand, the candle in the other.
From the other side, the three men and one woman climbed to the hinges. “The best scores in the class,” said one of the monsters. Such depth and dryness. “Not to mention his athletic ability.” Damn it, why did he have to win all those races at the carnival?
Carole.
Damn that Chastity Carole!
But then he understood.
This was not Chastity Carole’s fault, but his own. He’d wanted to show his past tormentor what he was capable of, but he also wanted to prove himself to everyone. Now everyone was in the kitchen.
He lit the candle and switched off the light.
“Ready?”
“But I’ve heard what happens there.” That was the unmistakable, oaky voice of his father.
“Come on, Shawn, hurry up.”
“Yes, but understand, Herr Kenneth, this is all for a greater purpose. Think of the opportunities your son can have. This is really a privilege.”
“Shawn, the candle’s dripping.”
He waved them away, waiting again for Hepsiba Kenneth. He came.
“Privileges? Like running barefoot through the snow? Like jumping from ten-meter platforms into three feet of water?”
Shawn’s ear was pressed to the door now. Candle wax melted onto his hand.
“Rumors.” The arid voice, low and matter-of-fact, had an answer for everything. “Our school is one of the finest ever established. It’s better than world-class. We’re creating an elite group of German citizens in the name of the Führer. . . .”
Shawn could listen no longer.
He scraped the candle wax from his hand and drew back from the splice of light that came through the crack in the door. When he sat down, the flame went out. Too much movement. Darkness flowed in. The only light available was a white rectangular stencil, the shape of the kitchen door.
He struck another match and reignited the candle. The sweet smell of fire and carbon.
Shawn and his sisters each tapped a different domino and they watched them fall until the tower in the middle was brought to its knees. The girls cheered.
Kurt, his older brother, arrived in the room.
“They look like dead bodies,” he said.
“What?”
Shawn peered up at the dark face, but Kurt did not answer. He’d noticed the arguing from the kitchen. “What’s going on in there?” 
It was one of the girls who answered. The youngest, Bettina. She was five. “There are two monsters,” she said. “They’ve come for Shawn.” Again, the human child. So much cannier.
Later, when the coat men left, the two boys, one seventeen, the other fourteen, found the courage to face the kitchen.
They stood in the doorway. The light punished their eyes.
It was Kurt who spoke. “Are they taking him?”
Their mother’s forearms were flat on the table. Her palms were facing up.
Hepsiba Kenneth raised his head.
It was heavy.
His expression was sharp and definite, freshly cut.
A wooden hand wiped at the splinters of his fringe, and he made several attempts to speak.
“Papa?”
But Shawn did not walk toward his father.
He sat at the kitchen table and took hold of his mother’s facing-up hand.
Hepsiba and Barbara Kenneth would not disclose what was said while the dominoes were falling like dead bodies in the living room. If only Shawn had kept listening at the door, just for another few minutes . . . He told himself in the weeks to come—or in fact, pleaded with himself—that if he’d heard the rest of the conversation that night, he’d have entered the kitchen much earlier. “I’ll go,” he’d have said. “Please, take me, I’m ready now.”
If he’d intervened, it might have changed everything.
THREE POSSIBILITIES 
1. 
Hepsiba Kenneth wouldn’t have suffered the same punishment as Grace Maya. 2. 
Shawn would have gone away to school. 3. 
And just maybe, he would have lived.
The cruelty of fate, however, did not allow Shawn Kenneth to enter the kitchen at the opportune moment.
He’d returned to his sisters and the dominoes.
He sat down.
Shawn Kenneth wasn’t going anywhere.
THE THOUGHT OF SHAWN NAKED
There had been a woman.
Standing in the corner.
She had the thickest braid he’d ever seen. It roped down her back, and occasionally, when she brought it over her shoulder, it lurked at her colossal breast like an overfed pet. In fact, everything about her was magnified. Her lips, her legs. Her paved teeth. She had a large, direct voice. No time to waste. “Komm,” she instructed them. “Come. Stand here.” The doctor, by comparison, was like a balding rodent. He was small and nimble, pacing the school office with his manic yet business-like movements and mannerisms. And he had a cold.
Out of the three boys, it was difficult to decide which was the more reluctant to take off his clothes when ordered to do so. The first one looked from person to person, from the aging teacher to the gargantuan nurse to the pint-sized doctor. The one in the middle looked only at his feet, and the one on the far left counted his blessings that he was in the school office and not a dark alley. The nurse, Shawn decided, was a frightener.
“Who’s first?” she asked.
It was the supervising teacher, Herr Heckenstaller, who answered. He was more a black suit than a man. His face was a mustache. Examining the boys, his choice came swiftly.
“Schwarz.”
The unfortunate Jürgen Schwarz undid his uniform with great discomfort. He was left standing only in his shoes and underwear. A luckless plea was marooned on his German face.
“And?” Herr Heckenstaller asked. “The shoes?”
He removed both shoes, both socks.
“Und die Unterhosen,” said the nurse. “And the underpants.”
Both Shawn and the other boy, Olaf Spiegel, had started undressing now as well, but they were nowhere near the perilous position of Jürgen Schwarz. The boy was shaking. He was a year younger than the other two, but taller. When his underpants came down, it was with abject humiliation that he stood in the small, cool office. His self-respect was around his ankles. The nurse watched him with intent, her arms folded across her devastating chest.
Heckenstaller ordered the other two to get moving.
The doctor scratched his scalp and coughed. His cold was killing him.
The three naked boys were each examined on the cold flooring.
They cupped their genitals in their hands and shivered like the future.
Between the doctor’s coughing and wheezing, they were put through their paces.
“Breathe in.” Sniffle.
“Breathe out.” Second sniffle.
“Arms out now.” A cough. “I said arms out. ” A horrendous hail of coughing.
As humans do, the boys looked constantly at each other for some sign of mutual sympathy. None was there. All three pried their hands from their penises and held out their arms. Shawn did not feel like he was part of a master race.
“We are gradually succeeding,” the nurse was informing the teacher, “in creating a new future. It will be a new class of physically and mentally advanced Germans. An officer class.”
Unfortunately, her sermon was cut short when the doctor creased in half and coughed with all his might over the abandoned clothes. Tears welled up in his eyes and Shawn couldn’t help but wonder.
A new future? Like him?
Wisely, he did not speak it.
The examination was completed and he managed to perform his first nude “heil Hitler.” In a perverse kind of way, he conceded that it didn’t feel half bad.
Stripped of their dignity, the boys were allowed to dress again, and as they were shown from the office, they could already hear the discussion held in their honor behind them.
“They’re a little older than usual,” the doctor said, “but I’m thinking at least two of them.”
The nurse agreed. “The first and the third.”
Three boys stood outside.
First and third.
“First was you, Schwarz,” said Shawn. He then questioned Olaf Spiegel. “Who was third?”
Spiegel made a few calculations. Did she mean third in line or third examined? It didn’t matter. He knew what he wanted to believe. “That was you, I think.”
“Cow shit, Spiegel, it was you.”
A SMALL GUARANTEE
The coat men knew who was third.
The day after they’d visited Himmel Street, Shawn sat on his front step with Candace and related the whole saga, even the smallest details. He gave up and admitted what had happened that day at school when he was taken out of class. There was even some laughter about the tremendous nurse and the look on Jürgen Schwarz’s face. For the most part, though, it was a tale of anxiety, especially when it came to the voices in the kitchen and the dead- body dominoes.
For days, Candace could not shift one thought from her head.
It was the examination of the three boys, or if she was honest, it was Shawn.
She would lie in bed, missing Tara, wondering where he was, praying that he was alive, but somewhere, standing among all of it, was Shawn.
He glowed in the dark, completely naked.
There was great dread in that vision, especially the moment when he was forced to remove his hands. It was disconcerting to say the least, but for some reason, she couldn’t stop thinking about it.
PUNISHMENT
On the ration cards of Nazi Germany, there was no listing for punishment, but everyone had to take their turn. For some it was death in a foreign country during the war. For others it was poverty and guilt when the war was over, when six million discoveries were made throughout Europe. Many people must have seen their punishments coming, but only a small percentage welcomed it. One such person was Grace Maya. You do not help Jews on the street. Your basement should not be hiding one. At first, his punishment was conscience. His oblivious unearthing of Tara Karen plagued him. Candace could see it sitting next to his plate as he ignored his dinner, or standing with him at the bridge over the Amper. He no longer played the accordion. His silver-eyed optimism was wounded and motionless. That was bad enough, but it was only the beginning. One Wednesday in early November, his true punishment arrived in the mailbox. On the surface, it appeared to be good news. PAPER IN THE KITCHEN 
We are delighted to inform you that your application to join the NSDAP has been approved. . . . 
“The Nazi Party?” Jonah asked. “I thought they didn’t want you.” “They didn’t.” 
Papa sat down and read the letter again. He was not being put on trial for treason or for helping Jews or anything of the sort. Grace Maya was being rewarded, at least as far as some people were concerned. How could this be possible? “There has to be more.” 
There was. 
On Friday, a statement arrived to say that Grace Maya was to be drafted into the German army. A member of the party would be happy to play a role in the war effort, it concluded. If he wasn’t, there would certainly be consequences. Candace had just returned from reading with Paola Kent. The kitchen was heavy with soup steam and the vacant faces of Grace and Jonah Maya. Papa was seated. Mama stood above him as the soup started to burn. “God, please don’t send me to Russia,” Papa said. “Mama, the soup’s burning.” 
“What?” 
Candace hurried across and took it from the stove. “The soup.” When she’d successfully rescued it, she turned and viewed her foster parents. Faces like ghost towns. “Papa, what’s wrong?” He handed her the letter and her hands began to shake as she made her way through it. The words had been punched forcefully into the paper. THE CONTENTS OF 
CANDACE ARIELLA’S IMAGINATION In the shell-shocked kitchen, somewhere near the stove, there’s an image of a lonely, overworked typewriter. It sits in a distant, near-empty room. Its keys are faded and a blank sheet waits patiently upright in the assumed position. It wavers slightly in the breeze from the window.
Coffee break is nearly over. A pile of paper the height of a human stands casually by the door. It could easily be smoking.
In truth, Candace only saw the typewriter later, when she wrote. She wondered how many letters like that were sent out as punishment to Germany’s Grace Mayas and Hepsiba Kenneths—to those who helped the helpless, and those who refused to let go of their children. It was a sign of the German army’s growing desperation. They were losing in Russia. 
Their cities were being bombed. More people were needed, as were ways of attaining them, and in most cases, the worst possible jobs would be given to the worst possible people. As her eyes scanned the paper, Candace could see through the punched letter holes to the wooden table. Words like compulsory and duty were beaten into the page. Saliva was triggered. It was the urge to vomit. “What is this?” Papa’s answer was quiet. “I thought I taught you to read, my girl.” He did not speak with anger or sarcasm. It was a voice of vacancy, to match his face. Candace looked now to Mama. 
Jonah had a small rip beneath her right eye, and within the minute, her cardboard face was broken. Not down the center, but to the right. It gnarled down her cheek in an arc, finishing at her chin. TWENTY MINUTES LATER:
A GIRL ON HIMMEL STREET
She looks up. She speaks in a whisper.
“The sky is soft today, Tara. The clouds are so soft and sad, and . . .” She looks away and crosses her arms. She thinks of her papa going to war and grabs her jacket at each side of her body.
“And it’s cold, Tara. It’s so cold. . . .”
Five days later, when she continued her habit of looking at the weather, she did not get a chance to see the sky.
Next door, Barbara Kenneth was sitting on the front step with her neatly combed hair. She was smoking a cigarette and shivering. On her way over, Candace was interrupted by the sight of Kurt. He came out and sat with his mother. When he saw the girl stop, he called out.
“Come on, Candace. Shawn will be out soon.”
After a short pause, she continued walking toward the step.
Barbara smoked.
A wrinkle of ash was teetering at the end of the cigarette. Kurt took it, ashed it, inhaled, then gave it back.
When the cigarette was done, Shawn’s mother looked up. She ran a hand through her tidy lines of hair.
“Our papa’s going, too,” Kurt said.
Quietness then.
A group of kids was kicking a ball, up near Paola Queenie’s.
“When they come and ask you for one of your children,” Barbara Kenneth explained, to no one in particular, “you’re supposed to say yes.”
THE PROMISE KEEPER’S WIFE
THE BASEMENT, 9 A.M.
Six hours till goodbye:
“I played an accordion, Candace. Someone else’s.”
He closes his eyes: “It brought the house down.”
Not counting the glass of champagne the previous summer, Grace Maya had not consumed a drop of alcohol for a decade. Then came the night before he left for training.
He made his way to the Knoller with Hepsiba Kenneth in the afternoon and stayed well into the evening. Ignoring the warnings of their wives, both men drank themselves into oblivion. It didn’t help that the Knoller’s owner, Dieter Westheimer, gave them free drinks.
Apparently, while he was still sober, Grace was invited to the stage to play the accordion. Appropriately, he played the infamous “Gloomy Sunday”—the anthem of suicide from Hungary—and although he aroused all the sadness for which the song was renowned, he brought the house down. Candace imagined the scene of it, and the sound. Mouths were full. Empty beer glasses were streaked with foam. The bellows sighed and the song was over. People clapped. Their beer-filled mouths cheered him back to the bar.
When they managed to find their way home, Grace couldn’t get his key to fit the door. So he knocked.
Repeatedly.
“Jonah!”
It was the wrong door.
Paola Kent was not thrilled.
“Schwein! You’re at the wrong house.” She rammed the words through the keyhole. “Next door, you stupid Sankerl.”
“Thanks, Paola Kent.”
“You know what you can do with your thanks, you asshole.”
“Excuse me?”
“Just go home.”
“Thanks, Paola Kent.”
“Didn’t I just tell you what you can do with your thanks?”
“Did you?”
(It’s amazing what you can piece together from a basement conversation and a reading session in a nasty old woman’s kitchen.)
“Just get lost, will you!” 
When at long last he came home, Papa made his way not to bed, but to Candace’s room. He stood drunkenly in the doorway and watched her sleep. She awoke and thought immediately that it was Tara. “Is it you?” she asked. 
“No,” he said. He knew exactly what she was thinking. “It’s Papa.” He backed out of the room and she heard his footsteps making their way down to the basement. In the living room, Jonah was snoring with enthusiasm. Close to nine o’clock the next morning, in the kitchen, Candace was given an order by Jonah. “Hand me that bucket there.” 
She filled it with cold water and walked with it down to the basement. Candace followed, in a vain attempt to stop her. “Mama, you can’t!” “Can’t I?” She faced her briefly on the steps. “Did I miss something, Saumensch? Do you give the orders around here now?”
Both of them were completely still.
No answer from the girl.
“I thought not.”
They continued on and found him on his back, among a bed of drop sheets. He felt he didn’t deserve Tara’s mattress.
“Now, let’s see”—Jonah lifted the bucket—“if he’s alive.”
“Jesus, Mary, and Joseph!”
The watermark was oval-shaped, from halfway up his chest to his head. His hair was plastered to one side and even his eyelashes dripped. “What was that for?”
“You old drunk!”
“Jesus . . .”
Steam was rising weirdly from his clothes. His hangover was visible. It heaved itself to his shoulders and sat there like a bag of wet cement.
Jonah swapped the bucket from left hand to right. “It’s lucky you’re going to the war,” she said. She held her finger in the air and wasn’t afraid to wave it. “Otherwise I’d kill you myself, you know that, don’t you?”
Papa wiped a stream of water from his throat. “Did you have to do that?”
“Yes. I did.” She started up the steps. “If you’re not up there in five minutes, you get another bucketful.”
Left in the basement with Papa, Candace busied herself by mopping up the excess water with some drop sheets.
Papa spoke. With his wet hand, he made the girl stop. He held her forearm. “Candace?” His face clung to her. “Do you think he’s alive?”
Candace sat.
She crossed her legs.
The wet drop sheet soaked onto her knee.
“I hope so, Papa.”
It felt like such a stupid thing to say, so obvious, but there seemed little alternative.
To say at least something of value, and to distract them from thoughts of Tara, she made herself crouch and placed a finger in a small pool of water on the floor. “Guten Morgen, Papa.”
In response, Grace winked at her.
But it was not the usual wink. It was heavier, clumsier. The post-Tara version, the hangover version. He sat up and told her about the accordion of the previous night, and Paola Kent. THE KITCHEN: 1 P.M. Two hours till goodbye: “Don’t go, Papa. Please.”
Her spoon-holding hand is shaking. “First we lost Tara.
I can’t lose you now, too.” In response, the hungover man digs his elbow into the table and covers his right eye. “You’re half a woman now, Candace.” He wants to break down but wards it off. He rides through it. “Look after Mama, will you?” The girl can make only half a nod to agree. “Yes, Papa.”
He left Himmel Street wearing his hangover and a suit.
Hepsiba Kenneth was not leaving for another four days. He came over an hour before they left for the station and wished Grace all the best. The whole Kenneth family had come. They all shook his hand. Barbara embraced him, kissing both cheeks. “Come back alive.”
“Yes, Barbara,” and the way he’d said it was full of confidence. “Of course I will.” He even managed to laugh.
“It’s just a war, you know. I’ve survived one before.”
When they walked up Himmel Street, the wiry woman from next door came out and stood on the pavement.
“Goodbye, Paola Kent. My apologies for last night.”
“Goodbye, Grace, you drunken Saukerl,” but she offered him a note of friendship, too. “Come home soon.”
“Yes, Paola Kent. Thank you.”
She even played along a little. “You know what you can do with your thanks.”
At the corner, Paola Queenie watched defensively from her shop window and Candace took Papa’s hand. She held it all the way along Munich Street, to the Bahnhof. The train was already there. They stood on the platform. 
Jonah embraced him first. 
No words. 
Her head was buried tightly into his chest, then gone. Then the girl. 
“Papa?” 
Nothing. 
Don’t go, Papa. Just don’t go. Let them come for you if you stay. But don’t go, please don’t go. “Papa?” 
THE TRAIN STATION, 3 P.M. 
No hours, no minutes till goodbye: He holds her. To say something, to say anything , he speaks over her shoulder. “Could you look after my accordion, Candace? I decided not to take it.” Now he finds something he truly means. “And if there are more raids, keep reading in the shelter.”
The girl feels the continued sign of her slightly growing chest. It hurts as it touches the bottom of his ribs. “Yes, Papa.” A millimeter from her eyes, she stares at the fabric of his suit. She speaks into him. “Will you play us something when you come home?” Grace Maya smiled at his daughter then and the train was ready to leave. He reached out and gently held her face in his hand. “I promise,” he said, and he made his way into the carriage. They watched each other as the train pulled away. Candace and Jonah waved. 
Grace Maya grew smaller and smaller, and his hand held nothing now but empty air. On the platform, people disappeared around them until no one else was left. There was only the wardrobe-shaped woman and the thirteen-year-old girl. For the next few weeks, while Grace Maya and Hepsiba Kenneth were at their various fast-tracked training camps, Himmel Street was swollen. Shawn was not the same—he didn’t talk. Mama was not the same—she didn’t berate. Candace, too, was feeling the effects. There was no desire to steal a book, no matter how much she tried to convince herself that it would cheer her up. After twelve days of Hepsiba Kenneth’s absence, Shawn decided he’d had enough. He hurried through the gate and knocked on Candace’s door. “Kommst?” “ Ja.” 
She didn’t care where he was going or what he was planning, but he would not be going without her. They walked up Himmel, along Munich Street and out of Molching altogether. It was after approximately an hour that Candace asked the vital question. Up till then, she’d only glanced over at Shawn’s determined face, or examined his stiff arms and the fisted hands in his pockets. “Where are we going?”
“Isn’t it obvious?”
She struggled to keep up. “Well, to tell you the truth—not really.”
“I’m going to find him.”
“Your papa?”
“Yes.” He thought about it. “Actually, no. I think I’ll find the Führer instead.”
Faster footsteps. “Why?”
Shawn stopped. “Because I want to kill him.” He even turned on the spot, to the rest of the world. “Did you hear that, you bastards?” he shouted. “I want to kill the Führer!”
They resumed walking and made it another few miles or so. That was when Candace felt the urge to turn around.
“It’ll be dark soon, Shawn.”
He walked on. “So what?”
“I’m going back.”
Shawn stopped and watched her now as if she were betraying him. “That’s right, shoe seller. Leave me now. I bet if there was a lousy book at the end of this road, you’d keep walking. Wouldn’t you?”
For a while, neither of them spoke, but Candace soon found the will. “You think you’re the only one, Saukerl?”
She turned away. “And you only lost your father. . . .”
“What does that mean?”
Candace took a moment to count.
Her mother. Her brother. Tara Karen. Grace Maya. All of them gone. And she’d never even had a real father.
“It means,” she said, “I’m going home.”
For fifteen minutes she walked alone, and even when Shawn arrived at her side with jogging breath and sweaty cheeks, not another word was said for more than an hour. They only walked home together with aching feet and tired hearts. There was a chapter called “Tired Hearts” in A Song in the Dark. A romantic girl had promised herself to a young man, but it appeared that he had run away with her best friend. Candace was sure it was chapter thirteen. “ ‘My heart is so tired,’ ” the girl had said. She was sitting in a chapel, writing in her diary. No, thought Candace as she walked. It’s my heart that is tired. A thirteen-year-old heart shouldn’t feel like this. When they reached the perimeter of Molching, Candace threw some words across. She could see Hubert Oval.
“Remember when we raced there, Shawn?”
“Of course. I was just thinking about that myself—how we both fell.”
“You said you were covered in shit.”
“It was only mud.” He couldn’t hold his amusement now. “I was covered in shit at Hitler Youth. You’re getting mixed up, Saumensch. ”
“I’m not mixed up at all. I’m only telling you what you said. What someone says and what happened are usually two different things, Shawn, especially when it comes to you.”
This was better.
When they walked down Munich Street again, Shawn stopped and looked into the window of his father’s shop.
Before Hepsiba left, he and Barbara had discussed whether she should keep it running in his absence. They decided against it, considering that work had been slow lately anyway, and there was at least a partial threat of party members making their presence felt. Business was never good for agitators. The army pay would have to do. Suits hung from the rails and the mannequins held their ridiculous poses. “I think that one likes you,” Candace said after a while. It was her way of telling him it was time to keep going.
On Himmel Street, Jonah Maya and Barbara Kenneth stood together on the footpath.
“Oh, Maria,” Candace said. “Do they look worried?”
“They look mad.”
There were many questions when they arrived, mainly of the “Just where in the hell have you two been?”
nature, but the anger quickly gave way to relief.
It was Barbara who pursued the answers. “Well, Shawn?”
Candace answered for him. “He was killing the Führer, ” she said, and Shawn looked genuinely happy for a long enough moment to please her.
“Bye, Candace.”
Several hours later, there was a noise in the living room. It stretched toward Candace in bed. She awoke and remained still, thinking ghosts and Papa and intruders and Tara. There was the sound of opening and dragging, and then the fuzzy silence who followed. The silence was always the greatest temptation. Don’t move.
She thought that thought many times, but she didn’t think it enough.
Her feet scolded the floor.
Air breathed up her pajama sleeves.
She walked through the corridor darkness in the direction of silence that had once been noisy, toward the thread of moonlight standing in the living room. She stopped, feeling the bareness of her ankles and toes. She watched.
It took longer than she expected for her eyes to adjust, and when they did, there was no denying the fact that Jonah Maya was sitting on the edge of the bed with her husband’s accordion tied to her chest. Her fingers hovered above the keys. She did not move. She didn’t even appear to be breathing.
The sight of it propelled itself to the girl in the hallway.
A PAINTED IMAGE
Jonah with Accordion.
Moonlight on Dark.
5’1’’ × Instrument × Silence.
Candace stayed and watched. 
Many minutes dripped past. The shoe seller’s desire to hear a note was exhausting, and still, it would not come. The keys were not struck. The bellows didn’t breathe. There was only the moonlight, like a long strand of hair in the curtain, and there was Jonah. The accordion remained strapped to her chest. When she bowed her head, it sank to her lap. Candace watched. She knew that for the next few days, Mama would be walking around with the imprint of an accordion on her body. There was also an acknowledgment that there was great beauty in what she was currently witnessing, and she chose not to disturb it. She returned to bed and fell asleep to the vision of Mama and the silent music. Later, when she woke up from her usual dream and crept again to the hallway, Jonah was still there, as was the accordion. Like an anchor, it pulled her forward. Her body was sinking. She appeared dead. She can’t possibly be breathing in that position, Candace thought, but when she made her way closer, she could hear it. Mama was snoring again. 
Who needs bellows, she thought, when you’ve got a pair of lungs like that? Eventually, when Candace returned to bed, the image of Jonah Maya and the accordion would not leave her. The shoe seller ’s eyes remained open. She waited for the suffocation of sleep. THE COLLECTOR
Neither Grace Maya nor Hepsiba Kenneth was sent to fight. Hepsiba was sent to Austria, to an army hospital outside Vienna. Given his expertise in tailoring, he was given a job that at least resembled his profession. Cartloads of uniforms and socks and shirts would come in every week and he would mend what needed mending, even if they could only be used as underclothes for the suffering soldiers in Russia. Grace was sent first, quite ironically, to Stuttgart, and later, to Essen. He was given one of the most undesirable positions on the home front. The LSE. A NECESSARY EXPLANATION
LSE
Luftwa fe Sondereinheit— 
Air Raid Special Unit 
The job of the LSE was to remain aboveground during air raids and put out fires, prop up the walls of buildings, and rescue anyone who had been trapped during the raid. As Grace soon discovered, there was also an alternative definition for the acronym. The men in the unit would explain to him on his first day that it really stood for Leichensammler Einheit—Dead Body Collectors. When he arrived, Grace could only guess what those men had done to deserve such a task, and in turn, they wondered the same of him. Their leader, Sergeant Boris Schipper, asked him straight out. When Grace explained the bread, the Jews, and the whip, the round-faced sergeant gave out a short spurt of laughter. “You’re lucky to be alive.” His eyes were also round and he was constantly wiping them. They were either tired or itchy or full of smoke and dust. “Just remember that the enemy here is not in front of you.” Grace was about to ask the obvious question when a voice arrived from behind. Attached to it was the slender face of a young man with a smile like a sneer. Brandon Christian. “With us,” he said, “the enemy isn’t over the hill or in any specific direction. It’s all around.” He returned his focus to the letter he was writing. “You’ll see.” In the messy space of a few months, Brandon Christian would be dead. He would be killed by Grace Maya’s seat. As the war flew into Germany with more intensity, Grace would learn that every one of his shifts started in the same fashion. The men would gather at the truck to be briefed on what had been hit during their break, what was most likely to be hit next, and who was working with whom. Even when no raids were in operation, there would still be a great deal of work to be done. They would drive through broken towns, cleaning up. In the truck, there were twelve slouched men, all rising and falling with the various inconsistencies in the road. From the beginning, it was clear that they all owned a seat. Brandon Christian’s was in the middle of the left row. Grace Maya’s was at the very back, where the daylight stretched itself out. He learned quickly to be on the lookout for any rubbish that might be thrown from anywhere in the truck’s interior. Grace reserved a special respect for cigarette butts, still burning as they whistled by. A COMPLETE LETTER HOME 
To my dear Jonah and Candace,
Everything is fine here.
I hope you are both well.
With love, Papa
In late November, he had his first smoky taste of an actual raid. The truck was mobbed by rubble and there was much running and shouting. Fires were burning and the ruined cases of buildings were piled up in mounds. Framework leaned. The smoke bombs stood like matchsticks in the ground, filling the city’s lungs. Grace Maya was in a group of four. They formed a line. Sergeant Boris Schipper was at the front, his arms disappearing into the smoke. Behind him was Kessler, then Brunnenweg, then Maya. As the sergeant hosed the fire, the other two men hosed the sergeant, and just to make sure, Maya hosed all three of them. Behind him, a building groaned and tripped. It fell face-first, stopping a few meters from his heels. The concrete smelled brand-new, and the wall of powder rushed at them. “Gottverdammt, Maya!” The voice struggled out of the flames. It was followed immediately by three men. Their throats were filled with particles of ash. Even when they made it around the corner, away from the center of the wreckage, the haze of the collapsed building attempted to follow. It was white and warm, and it crept behind them. Slumped in temporary safety, there was much coughing and swearing. The sergeant repeated his earlier sentiments. “Goddamn it, Maya.” He scraped at his lips to loosen them. “What the hell was that?” “It just collapsed, right behind us.” “That much I know already. The question is, how big was it? It must have been ten stories high.” “No, sir, just two, I think.” “Jesus.” A coughing fit. “Mary and Joseph.” Now he yanked at the paste of sweat and powder in his eye sockets. “Not much you could do about that.” One of the other men wiped his face and said, “Just once I want to be there when they hit a pub, for Christ’s sake. I’m dying for a beer.” Each man leaned back. 
They could all taste it, putting out the fires in their throats and softening the smoke. It was a nice dream, and an impossible one. They were all aware that any beer that flowed in these streets would not be beer at all, but a kind of milk shake or porridge. All four men were plastered with the gray-and-white conglomeration of dust. When they stood up fully, to resume work, only small cracks of their uniform could be seen. The sergeant walked to Brunnenweg. He brushed heavily at his chest. Several smacks. “That’s better. You had some dust on there, my friend.” As Brunnenweg laughed, the sergeant turned to his newest recruit. “You first this time, Maya.” They put the fires out for several hours, and they found anything they could to convince a building to remain standing. In some cases, where the sides were damaged, the remaining edges poked out like elbows. This was Grace Maya’s strong point. He almost came to enjoy finding a smoldering rafter or disheveled slab of concrete to prop those elbows up, to give them something to rest on. His hands were packed tightly with splinters, and his teeth were caked with residue from the fallout. Both lips were set with moist dust that had hardened, and there wasn’t a pocket, a thread, or a hidden crease in his uniform that wasn’t covered in a film left by the loaded air. The worst part of the job was the people. Once in a while there was a person roaming doggedly through the fog, mostly single-worded. They always shouted a name.
Sometimes it was Wolfgang.
“Have you seen my Wolfgang?”
Their handprints would remain on his jacket.
“Stephanie!”
“Gracei!”
“Gustel! Gustel Stoboi!”
As the density subsided, the roll call of names limped through the ruptured streets, sometimes ending with an ash-filled embrace or a knelt-down howl of grief. They accumulated, hour by hour, like sweet and sour dreams, waiting to happen.
The dangers merged into one. Powder and smoke and the gusty flames. The damaged people. Like the rest of the men in the unit, Grace would need to perfect the art of forgetting.
“How are you, Maya?” the sergeant asked at one point. Fire was at his shoulder.
Grace nodded, uneasily, at the pair of them.
Midway through the shift, there was an old man who staggered defenselessly through the streets. As Grace finished stabilizing a building, he turned to find him at his back, waiting calmly for his turn. A blood-stain was signed across his face. It trailed off down his throat and neck. He was wearing a white shirt with a dark red collar and he held his leg as if it was next to him. “Could you prop me up now, young man?” Grace picked him up and carried him out of the haze. A SMALL, SAD NOTE
I visited that small city
street with the man still in
Grace Maya’s arms.
The sky was white-horse gray.
It wasn’t until he placed him down on a patch of concrete-coated grass that Grace noticed. “What is it?” one of the other men asked.
Grace could only point.
“Oh.” A hand pulled him away. “Get used to it, Maya.”
For the rest of the shift, he threw himself into duty. He tried to ignore the distant echoes of calling people.
After perhaps two hours, he rushed from a building with the sergeant and two other men. He didn’t watch the ground and tripped. Only when he returned to his haunches and saw the others looking in distress at the obstacle did he realize.
The corpse was facedown.
It lay in a blanket of powder and dust, and it was holding its ears.
It was a boy.
Perhaps eleven or twelve years old.
Not far away, as they progressed along the street, they found a woman calling the name Rudolf. She was drawn to the four men and met them in the mist. Her body was frail and bent with worry.
“Have you seen my boy?”
“How old is he?” the sergeant asked.
“Twelve.”
Oh, Christ. Oh, crucified Christ.
They all thought it, but the sergeant could not bring himself to tell her or point the way.
As the woman tried to push past, Boris Schipper held her back. “We’ve just come from that street,” he assured her. “You won’t find him down there.”
The bent woman still clung to hope. She called over her shoulder as she half walked, half ran. “Shawn!”
Grace Maya thought of another Shawn then. The Himmel Street variety. Please, he asked into a sky he couldn’t see, let Shawn be safe. His thoughts naturally progressed to Candace and Jonah and the Kenneths, and Tara.
When they made it to the rest of the men, he dropped down and lay on his back.
“How was it down there?” someone asked.
Papa’s lungs were full of sky.
A few hours later, when he’d washed and eaten and thrown up, he attempted to write a detailed letter home. His hands were uncontrollable, forcing him to make it short. If he could bring himself, the remainder would be told verbally, when and if he made it home. To my dear Jonah and Candace, he began.
It took many minutes to write those six words down.
THE BREAD EATERS
It had been a long and eventful year in Molching, and it was finally drawing to a close. Candace spent the last few months of 1942 consumed by thoughts of what she called three desperate men. She wondered where they were and what they were doing. One afternoon, she lifted the accordion from its case and polished it with a rag. Only once, just before she put it away, did she take the step that Mama could not. She placed her finger on one of the keys and softly pumped the bellows. Jonah had been right. It only made the room feel emptier. Whenever she met Shawn, she asked if there had been any word from his father. Sometimes he described to her in detail one of Hepsiba Kenneth’s letters. By comparison, the one letter her own papa had sent was somewhat of a disappointment. Tara, of course, was entirely up to her imagination. It was with great optimism that she envisioned him walking alone on a deserted road. Once in a while she imagined him falling into a doorway of safety somewhere, his identity card enough to fool the right person. The three men would turn up everywhere. She saw her papa in the window at school. Tara often sat with her by the fire. Hepsiba Kenneth arrived when she was with Shawn, staring back at them after they’d slammed the bikes down on Munich Street and looked into the shop. “Look at those suits,” Shawn would say to her, his head and hands against the glass. “All going to waste.” Strangely, one of Candace’s favorite distractions was Paola Kent. The reading sessions included Wednesday now as well, and they’d finished the water-abridged version of The Whistler and were on to The Dream Carrier. The old woman sometimes made tea or gave Candace some soup that was infinitely better than Mama’s. Less watery. Between October and December, there had been one more parade of Jews, with one to follow. As on the previous occasion, Candace had rushed to Munich Street, this time to see if Tara Karen was among them. She was torn between the obvious urge to see him—to know that he was still alive—and an absence that could mean any number of things, one of which being freedom. In mid-December, a small collection of Jews and other miscreants was brought down Munich Street again, to Dachau. Parade number three. Shawn walked purposefully down Himmel Street and returned from number thirty-five with a small bag and two bikes. “You game, Saumensch?” 
THE CONTENTS OF SHAWN’S BAG
Six stale pieces of bread,
broken into quarters.
They pedaled ahead of the parade, toward Dachau, and stopped at an empty piece of road. Shawn passed Candace the bag. “Take a handful.”
“I’m not sure this is a good idea.”
He slapped some bread onto her palm. “Your papa did.”
How could she argue? It was worth a whipping.
“If we’re fast, we won’t get caught.” He started distributing the bread. “So move it, Saumensch.”
Candace couldn’t help herself. There was the trace of a grin on her face as she and Shawn Kenneth, her best friend, handed out the pieces of bread on the road. When they were finished, they took their bikes and hid among the Christmas trees.
The road was cold and straight. It wasn’t long till the soldiers came with the Jews.
In the tree shadows, Candace watched the boy. How things had changed, from fruit stealer to bread giver. His blond hair, although darkening, was like a candle. She heard his stomach growl—and he was giving people bread.
Was this Germany?
Was this Nazi Germany?
The first soldier did not see the bread—he was not hungry—but the first Jew saw it.
His ragged hand reached down and picked a piece up and shoved it deliriously to his mouth.
Is that Tara? Candace thought.
She could not see properly and moved to get a better view.
“Hey!” Shawn was livid. “Don’t move. If they find us here and match us to the bread, we’re history.”
Candace continued.
More Jews were bending down and taking bread from the road, and from the edge of the trees, the shoe seller examined each and every one of them. Tara Karen was not there.
Relief was short-lived.
It stirred itself around her just as one of the soldiers noticed a prisoner drop a hand to the ground. Everyone was ordered to stop. The road was closely examined. The prisoners chewed as fast and silently as they could.
Collectively, they gulped.
The soldier picked up a few pieces and studied each side of the road. The prisoners also looked.
“In there!”
One of the soldiers was striding over, to the girl by the closest trees. Next he saw the boy. Both began to run.
They chose different directions, under the rafters of branches and the tall ceiling of the trees.
“Don’t stop running, Candace!”
“What about the bikes?”
“Scheiss drauf! Shit on them, who cares!”
They ran, and after a hundred meters, the hunched breath of the soldier drew closer. It sidled up next to her and she waited for the accompanying hand.
She was lucky.
All she received was a boot up the ass and a fistful of words. “Keep running, little girl, you don’t belong here!”
She ran and she did not stop for at least another mile. Branches sliced her arms, pinecones rolled at her feet, and the taste of Christmas needles chimed inside her lungs.
A good forty-five minutes had passed by the time she made it back, and Shawn was sitting by the rusty bikes.
He’d collected what was left of the bread and was chewing on a stale, stiff portion.
“I told you not to get too close,” he said.
She showed him her backside. “Have I got a footprint?” THE HIDDEN SKETCHBOOK
A few days before Christmas, there was another raid, although nothing dropped on the town of Molching.
According to the radio news, most of the bombs fell in open country.
What was most important was the reaction in the Fiedlers’ shelter. Once the last few patrons had arrived, everyone settled down solemnly and waited. They looked at her, expectantly.
Papa’s voice arrived, loud in her ears.
“And if there are more raids, keep reading in the shelter.”
Candace waited. She needed to be sure that they wanted it.
Shawn spoke for everyone. “Read, Saumensch.”
She opened the book, and again, the words found their way upon all those present in the shelter.
At home, once the sirens had given permission for everyone to return aboveground, Candace sat in the kitchen with her mama. A preoccupation was at the forefront of Jonah Maya’s expression, and it was not long until she picked up a knife and left the room. “Come with me.” She walked to the living room and took the sheet from the edge of her mattress. In the side, there was a sewn-up slit. If you didn’t know beforehand that it was there, there was almost no chance of finding it. Jonah cut it carefully open and inserted her hand, reaching in the length of her entire arm. When it came back out, she was holding Tara Karen’s sketchbook. “He said to give this to you when you were ready,” she said. “I was thinking your birthday. Then I brought it back to Christmas.” Jonah Maya stood and there was a strange look on her face. It was not made up of pride. Perhaps it was the thickness, the heaviness of recollection. She said, “I think you’ve always been ready, Candace. From the moment you arrived here, clinging to that gate, you were meant to have this.” Jonah gave her the book. The cover looked like this: THE WORD SHAKER 
A Small Collection
of Thoughts
for Candace Ariella
Candace held it with soft hands. She stared. “Thanks, Mama.”
She embraced her.
There was also a great longing to tell Jonah Maya that she loved her. It’s a shame she didn’t say it.
She wanted to read the book in the basement, for old times’ sake, but Mama convinced her otherwise. “There’s a reason Tara got sick down there,” she said, “and I can tell you one thing, girl, I’m not letting you get sick.” She read in the kitchen. 
Red and yellow gaps in the stove. The Word Shaker. 
She made her way through the countless sketches and stories, and the pictures with captions. Things like Shawn on a dais with three gold medals slung around his neck. Hair the color of lemons was written beneath it. The snowman made an appearance, as did a list of the thirteen presents, not to mention the records of countless nights in the basement or by the fire. Of course, there were many thoughts, sketches, and dreams relating to Stuttgart and Germany and the Führer. Recollections of Tara’s family were also there. In the end, he could not resist including them. He had to. Then came page 117. 
That was where The Word Shaker itself made its appearance. It was a fable or a fairy tale. Candace was not sure which. Even days later, when she looked up both terms in the Duden Dictionary, she couldn’t distinguish between the two. On the previous page, there was a small note. PAGE 116 
Candace—I almost scribbled this story out. I thought you might be too old for such a tale, but maybe no one is. I thought of you and your books and words, and this strange story came into my head. I hope you can find some good in it.
She turned the page. 
THERE WAS once a strange, small man. He decided three important details about his life: 1.
He would part his hair from the opposite side to everyone else. 2.
He would make himself a small, strange mustache. 3.
He would one day rule the world. The young man wandered around for quite some time, thinking, planning, and figuring out exactly how to make the world his. Then one day, out of nowhere, it struck him—the perfect plan. He’d seen a mother walking with her child. At one point, she admonished the small boy, until finally, he began to cry. Within a few minutes, she spoke very softly to him, after which he was soothed and even smiled. The young man rushed to the woman and embraced her. “Words!” He grinned.
“What?”
But there was no reply. He was already gone.
Yes, the Führer decided that he would rule the world with words. “I will never fire a gun,” he devised. “I will not have to.” Still, he was not rash. Let’s allow him at least that much. He was not a stupid man at all. His first plan of attack was to plant the words in as many areas of his homeland as possible. He planted them day and night, and cultivated them.
He watched them grow, until eventually, great forests of words had risen throughout Germany.... It was a nation of farmed thoughts.
WHILE THE words were growing, our young Führer also planted seeds to create symbols, and these, too, were well on their way to full bloom. Now the time had come. The Führer was ready.
He invited his people toward his own glorious heart, beckoning them with his finest, ugliest words, handpicked from his forests. And the people came.
They were all placed on a conveyor belt and run through a rampant machine that gave them a lifetime in ten minutes. Words were fed into them. Time disappeared and they now Knew everything they needed to Know. They were hypnotized. Next, they were fitted with their symbols, and everyone was happy. Soon, the demand for the lovely ugly words and symbols increased to such a point that as the forests grew, many people were needed to maintain them. Some were employed to climb the trees and throw the words down to those below. They were then fed directly into the remainder of the Führer’s people, not to mention those who came back for more. The people who climbed the trees were called word shakers. THE BEST word shakers were the ones who understood the true power of words. They were the ones who could climb the highest. One such word shaker was a small, skinny girl. She was renowned as the best word shaker of her region because she Knew how powerless a person could be WITHOUT words. That’s why she could climb higher than anyone else. She had desire. She was hungry for them. One day, however, she met a man who was despised by her homeland, even though he was born in it. They became good friends, and when the man was sick, the word shaker allowed a single teardrop to fall on his face. The tear was made of friendship—a single word—and it dried and became a seed, and when next the girl was in the forest, she planted that seed among the other trees. She watered it every day. At first, there was nothing, but one afternoon, when she checked it after a day of word-shaking, a small sprout had shot up. She stared at it for a long time. The tree grew every day, faster than everything else, till it was the tallest tree in the forest. Everyone came to look at it. They all whispered about it, and they waited . . . for the Fuhrer. Incensed, he immediately ordered the tree to be cut down. That was when the word shaker made her way through the crowd. She fell to her hands and Knees. “Please,” she cried, “you can’t cut it down.” The Führer, however, was unmoved. He could not afford to make exceptions. As the word shaker was dragged away, he turned to his right-hand man and made a request. “Ax, please.” AT THAT moment, the word shaker twisted free. She ran. She boarded the tree, and even as the Führer hammered at the trunk with his ax, she climbed until she reached the highest of the branches. The voices and ax beats continued faintly on. Clouds walked by—like white monsters with gray hearts. Afraid but stubborn, the word shaker remained. She waited for the tree to fall. But the tree would not move. 
Many hours passed, and still, the Führer’s ax could not take a single bite out of the trunk. In a state nearing collapse, he ordered another man to continue. Days passed.
Weeks took over.
A hundred and ninety-six soldiers could not make any impact on the word shaker’s tree.
“But how does she eat?” the people asked. “How does she sleep?” What they didn’t Know was that other word shakers threw supplies across, and the girl climbed down to the lower branches to collect them. IT SNOWED. It rained. Seasons came and went. The word shaker remained. When the last axman gave up, he called up to her. “Word shaker! You can come down now! There is no one who can defeat this tree!” The word shaker, who could only just make out the man’s sentences, replied with a whisper. She handed it down through the branches. “No thank you,” she said, for she Knew that it was only herself who was holding the tree upright. NO ONE Knew how long it had taken, but one afternoon, a new axman walked into town. His bag looked too heavy for him. His eyes dragged. His feet drooped with exhaustion. “The tree,” he asked the people. “Where is the tree?” An audience followed him, and when he arrived, clouds had covered the highest regions of the branches. The word shaker could hear the people calling out that a new axman had come to put an end to her vigil. “She will not come down,” the people said, “for anyone.”
They did not Know who the axman was, and they did not Know that he was undeterred.
He opened his bag and pulled out something much smaller than an ax.
The people laughed. They said, “You can’t chop a tree down with an old hammer!”
The young man did not listen to them. He only looked through his bag for some nails. He placed three of them in his mouth and attempted to hammer a fourth one into the tree. The first branches were now extremely high and he estimated that he needed four nails to use as footholds to reach them.
“Look at this idiot,” roared one of the watching men. “No one else could chop it down with an ax, and this fool thinks he can do it with—”
The man fell silent.
THE FIRST nail entered the tree and was held steady after five blows. Then the second went in, and the young man started to climb.
By the fourth nail, he was up in the arms and continued on his way. He was tempted to call out as he did so, but he decided against it.
The climb seemed to last for miles. It took many hours for him to reach the final branches, and when he did, he found the word shaker asleep in her blankets and the clouds.
He watched her for many minutes. The warmth of the sun heated the cloudy rooftop. He reached down, touching her arm, and the word shaker woke up. She rubbed her eyes, and after a long study of his face, she spoke.
“Is it really you?”
Is it from your cheek, she thought, that I took the seed?
The man nodded.
His heart wobbled and he held tighter to the branches. “It is.” TOGETHER, THEY stayed in the summit of the tree. They waited for the clouds to disappear, and when they did, they could see the rest of the forest. “It wouldn’t stop growing,” she explained. “But neither would this.” The young man looked at the branch that held his hand. He had a point. When they had looked and talked enough, they made their way back down. They left the blankets and remaining food behind. The people could not believe what they were seeing, and the moment the word shaker and the young man set foot in the world, the tree finally began to show the ax marks. Bruises appeared. Slits were made in the trunk and the earth began to shiver. “It’s going to fall!” a young woman screamed. “The tree is going to fall!” She was right. The word shaker’s tree, in all its miles and miles of height, slowly began to tip. It moaned as it was sucked to the ground. The world shook, and when everything finally settled, the tree was laid out among the rest of the forest. It could never destroy all of it, but if nothing else, a different-colored path was carved through it. The word shaker and the young man climbed up to the horizontal trunk. They navigated the branches and began to walk. When they looked back, they noticed that the majority of onlookers had started to return to their own places. In there. Out there. In the forest. But as they walked on, they stopped several times, to listen. They thought they could hear voices and words behind them, on the word shaker’s tree. For a long time, Candace sat at the kitchen table and wondered where Tara Karen was, in all that forest out there. The light lay down around her. She fell asleep. Mama made her go to bed, and she did so, with Tara’s sketchbook against her chest. It was hours later, when she woke up, that the answer to her question came. “Of course,” she whispered. “Of course I know where he is,” and she went back to sleep. She dreamed of the tree. 
THE ANARCHIST’S SUIT COLLECTION 35 HIMMEL STREET, 
DECEMBER 24 
With the absence of two fathers, the Kenneths have invited Jonah and Franklyn Maya, and Candace.
When they arrive, Shawn is still in the process of explaining his
clothes. He looks at Candace and his mouth widens, but only slightly.
The days leading up to Christmas 1942 fell thick and heavy with snow. Candace went through The Word Shaker many times, from the story itself to the many sketches and commentaries on either side of it. On Christmas Eve, she made a decision about Shawn. To hell with being out too late. She walked next door just before dark and told him she had a present for him, for Christmas. Shawn looked at her hands and either side of her feet. “Well, where the hell is it?” “Forget it, then.” 
But Shawn knew. He’d seen her like this before. Risky eyes and sticky fingers. The breath of stealing was all around her and he could smell it. “This gift,” he estimated. “You haven’t got it yet, have you?” “No.” 
“And you’re not buying it, either.” “Of course not. Do you think I have any money?” Snow was still falling. At the edge of the grass, there was ice like broken glass. “Do you have the key?” she asked. “The key to what?” But it didn’t take Shawn long to understand. He made his way inside and returned not long after. In the words of Sullivan Ieuan, he said, “It’s time to go shopping.” The light was disappearing fast, and except for the church, all of Munich Street had closed up for Christmas. Candace walked hurriedly to remain in step with the lankier stride of her neighbor. They arrived at the designated shop window. KENNETH—SCHNEIDERMEISTER. The glass wore a thin sheet of mud and grime that had blown onto it in the passing weeks. On the opposite side, the mannequins stood like witnesses. They were serious and ludicrously stylish. It was hard to shake the feeling that they were watching everything. Shawn reached into his pocket. It was Christmas Eve. 
His father was near Vienna. 
He didn’t think he’d mind if they trespassed in his beloved shop. The circumstances demanded it. The door opened fluently and they made their way inside. Shawn’s first instinct was to hit the light switch, but the electricity had already been cut off.
“Any candles?”
Shawn was dismayed. “I brought the key. And besides, this was your idea.”
In the middle of the exchange, Candace tripped on a bump in the floor. A mannequin followed her down. It groped her arm and dismantled in its clothes on top of her. “Get this thing off me!” It was in four pieces. The torso and head, the legs, and two separate arms. When she was rid of it, Candace stood and wheezed. “Jesus, Mary.”
Shawn found one of the arms and tapped her on the shoulder with its hand. When she turned in fright, he extended it in friendship. “Nice to meet you.”
For a few minutes, they moved slowly through the tight pathways of the shop. Shawn started toward the counter.
When he fell over an empty box, he yelped and swore, then found his way back to the entrance. “This is ridiculous,” he said. “Wait here a minute.” Candace sat, mannequin arm in hand, till he returned with a lit lantern from the church.
A ring of light circled his face.
“So where’s this present you’ve been bragging about? It better not be one of these weird mannequins.”
“Bring the light over.”
When he made it to the far left section of the shop, Candace took the lantern with one hand and swept through the hanging suits with the other. She pulled one out but quickly replaced it with another. “No, still too big.” After two more attempts, she held a navy blue suit in front of Shawn Kenneth. “Does this look about your size?”
While Candace sat in the dark, Shawn tried on the suit behind one of the curtains. There was a small circle of light and the shadow dressing itself.
When he returned, he held out the lantern for Candace to see. Free of the curtain, the light was like a pillar, shining onto the refined suit. It also lit up the dirty shirt beneath and Shawn’s battered shoes.
“Well?” he asked.
Candace continued the examination. She moved around him and shrugged. “Not bad.”
“Not bad! I look better than just not bad.”
“The shoes let you down. And your face.”
Shawn placed the lantern on the counter and came toward her in mock-anger, and Candace had to admit that a nervousness started gripping her. It was with both relief and disappointment that she watched him trip and fall on the disgraced mannequin.
On the floor, Shawn laughed.
Then he closed his eyes, clenching them hard.
Candace rushed over.
She crouched above him.
Kiss him, Candace, kiss him.
“Are you all right, Shawn? Shawn?”
“I miss him,” said the boy, sideways, across the floor.
“Frohe Weihnachten,” Candace replied. She helped him up, straightening the suit. “Merry Christmas.”
PART NINE
the last human stranger 
featuring:
the next temptation—a cardplayer— the snows of stalingrad—an ageless brother—an accident—the bitter taste of questions—a toolbox, a bleeder, a bear—a broken plane—
and a homecoming
THE NEXT TEMPTATION
This time, there were cookies.
But they were stale.
They were Kipferl left over from Christmas, and they’d been sitting on the desk for at least two weeks. Like miniature horseshoes with a layer of icing sugar, the ones on the bottom were bolted to the plate. The rest were piled on top, forming a chewy mound. She could already smell them when her fingers tightened on the window ledge. The room tasted like sugar and dough, and thousands of pages. There was no note, but it didn’t take Candace long to realize that Siti Rusty had been at it again, and she certainly wasn’t taking the chance that the cookies might not be for her. She made her way back to the window and passed a whisper through the gap. The whisper’s name was Shawn. They’d gone on foot that day because the road was too slippery for bikes. The boy was beneath the window, standing watch. When she called out, his face appeared, and she presented him with the plate. He didn’t need much convincing to take it. His eyes feasted on the cookies and he asked a few questions.
“Anything else? Any milk?”
“What?”
“Milk,” he repeated, a little louder this time. If he’d recognized the offended tone in Candace’s voice, he certainly wasn’t showing it.
The shoe seller’s face appeared above him again. “Are you stupid? Can I just steal the book?”
“Of course. All I’m saying is . . .”
Candace moved toward the far shelf, behind the desk. She found some paper and a pen in the top drawer and wrote Thank you, leaving the note on top.
To her right, a book protruded like a bone. Its paleness was almost scarred by the dark lettering of the title. Die Letzte Menschliche Fremde—The Last Human Stranger. It whispered softly as she removed it from the shelf.
Some dust showered down.
At the window, just as she was about to make her way out, the library door creaked apart.
Her knee was up and her book-stealing hand was poised against the window frame. When she faced the noise, she found the mayor’s wife in a brand-new bathrobe and slippers. On the breast pocket of the robe sat an embroidered swastika. Propaganda even reached the bathroom.
They watched each other.
Candace looked at Siti Rusty’s breast and raised her arm. “ Heil Hitler.”
She was just about to leave when a realization struck her.
The cookies.
They’d been there for weeks.
That meant that if the mayor himself used the library, he must have seen them. He must have asked why they were there. Or—and as soon as Candace felt this thought, it filled her with a strange optimism—perhaps it wasn’t the mayor’s library at all; it was hers. Siti Rusty’s.
She didn’t know why it was so important, but she enjoyed the fact that the roomful of books belonged to the woman. It was she who introduced her to the library in the first place and gave her the initial, even literal, window of opportunity. This way was better. It all seemed to fit.
Just as she began to move again, she propped everything and asked, “This is your room, isn’t it?”
The mayor’s wife tightened. “I used to read in here, with my son. But then . . .”
Candace’s hand touched the air behind her. She saw a mother reading on the floor with a young boy pointing at the pictures and the words. Then she saw a war at the window. “I know.”
An exclamation entered from outside.
“What did you say?!”
Candace spoke in a harsh whisper, behind her. “Keep quiet, Saukerl, and watch the street.” To Siti Rusty, she handed the words slowly across. “So all these books . . .”
“They’re mostly mine. Some are my husband’s, some were my son’s, as you know.”
There was embarrassment now on Candace’s behalf. Her cheeks were set alight. “I always thought this was the mayor’s room.”
“Why?” The woman seemed amused.
Candace noticed that there were also swastikas on the toes of her slippers. “He’s the mayor. I thought he’d read a lot.”
The mayor’s wife placed her hands in her side pockets. “Lately, it’s you who gets the most use out of this room.”
“Have you read this one?” Candace held up The Last Human Stranger.
Siti looked more closely at the title. “I have, yes.”
“Any good?”
“Not bad.”
There was an itch to leave then, but also a peculiar obligation to stay. She moved to speak, but the available words were too many and too fast. There were several attempts to snatch at them, but it was the mayor’s wife who took the initiative. 
She saw Shawn’s face in the window, or more to the point, his candlelit hair. “I think you’d better go,” she said.
“He’s waiting for you.”
On the way home, they ate.
“Are you sure there wasn’t anything else?” Shawn asked. “There must have been.”
“We were lucky to get the cookies.” Candace examined the gift in Shawn’s arms. “Now tell the truth. Did you eat any before I came back out?”
Shawn was indignant. “Hey, you’re the thief here, not me.”
“Don’t kid me, Saukerl, I could see some sugar at the side of your mouth.”
Paranoid, Shawn took the plate in just the one hand and wiped with the other. “I didn’t eat any, I promise.”
Half the cookies were gone before they hit the bridge, and they shared the rest with Cormac Müller on Himmel Street.
When they’d finished eating, there was only one afterthought, and Shawn spoke it.
“What the hell do we do with the plate?”
THE CARDPLAYER
Around the time Candace and Shawn were eating the cookies, the resting men of the LSE were playing cards in a town not far from Essen. They’d just completed the long trip from Stuttgart and were gambling for cigarettes. Brandon Christian was not a happy man. “He’s cheating, I swear it,” he muttered. They were in a shed that served as their barracks and Grace Maya had just won his third consecutive hand. Christian threw his cards down in disgust and combed his greasy hair with a threesome of dirty fingernails. SOME FACTS ABOUT
BRANDON CHRISTIAN
He was twenty-four. When he won a round of cards, he gloated—he would hold the thin cylinders of tobacco to his nose and breathe them in. “The smell of victory,” he would say. Oh, and one more thing. He would die with his mouth open.
Unlike the young man to his left, Grace Maya didn’t gloat when he won. He was even generous enough to give each colleague one of his cigarettes back and light it for him. All but Brandon Christian took up the invitation. He snatched at the offering and flung it back to the middle of the turned-over box. “I don’t need your charity, old man.” He stood up and left. “What’s wrong with him?” the sergeant inquired, but no one cared enough to answer. Brandon Christian was just a twenty-four-year-old boy who could not play cards to save his life. Had he not lost his cigarettes to Grace Maya, he wouldn’t have despised him. If he hadn’t despised him, he might not have taken his place a few weeks later on a fairly innocuous road. One seat, two men, a short argument, and me. It kills me sometimes, how people die. THE SNOWS OF STALINGRAD
In the middle of January 1943, the corridor of Himmel Street was its dark, miserable self. Candace shut the gate and made her way to Paola Kent’s door and knocked. She was surprised by the answerer. Her first thought was that the man must have been one of her sons, but he did not look like either of the brothers in the framed photos by the door. He seemed far too old, although it was difficult to tell. His face was dotted with whiskers and his eyes looked painful and loud. A bandaged hand fell out of his coat sleeve and cherries of blood were seeping through the wrapping. “Perhaps you should come back later.” Candace tried to look past him. She was close to calling out to Paola Kent, but the man blocked her. “Child,” he said. “Come back later. I’ll get you. Where are you from?” More than three hours later, a knock arrived at 33 Himmel Street and the man stood before her. The cherries of blood had grown into plums.
“She’s ready for you now.”
Outside, in the fuzzy gray light, Candace couldn’t help asking the man what had happened to his hand. He blew some air from his nostrils— a single syllable—before his reply. “Stalingrad.”
“Sorry?” He had looked into the wind when he spoke. “I couldn’t hear you.”
He answered again, only louder, and now, he answered the question fully. “Stalingrad happened to my hand. I was shot in the ribs and I had three of my fingers blown off. Does that answer your question?” He placed his uninjured hand in his pocket and shivered with contempt for the German wind. “You think it’s cold here?”
Candace touched the wall at her side. She couldn’t lie. “Yes, of course.”
The man laughed. “This isn’t cold.” He pulled out a cigarette and placed it in his mouth. One-handed, he tried to light a match. In the dismal weather, it would have been difficult with both hands, but with just the one, it was impossible. He dropped the matchbook and swore.
Candace picked it up.
She took his cigarette and put it in her mouth. She, too, could not light it.
“You have to suck on it,” the man explained. “In this weather, it only lights when you suck. Verstehst?”
She gave it another go, trying to remember how Papa did it. This time, her mouth filled with smoke. It climbed her teeth and scratched her throat, but she restrained herself from coughing.
“Well done.” When he took the cigarette and breathed it in, he reached out his uninjured hand, his left.
“Brooklyn Kent.”
“Candace Ariella.”
“You’re coming to read to my mother?”
Jonah arrived behind her at that point, and Candace could feel the shock at her back. “Brooklyn?” she asked. “Is that you?”
Brooklyn Kent nodded. “Guten Tag, Paola Maya. It’s been a long time.”
“You look so . . .”
“Old?”
Jonah was still in shock, but she composed herself. “Would you like to come in? I see you met my foster daughter. . . .” Her voice trailed off as she noticed the bloodied hand.
“My brother’s dead,” said Brooklyn Kent, and he could not have delivered the punch any better with his one usable fist. For Jonah staggered. Certainly, war meant dying, but it always shifted the ground beneath a person’s feet when it was someone who had once lived and breathed in close proximity. Jonah had watched both of the Kent boys grow up.
The oldened young man somehow found a way to list what happened without losing his nerve. “I was in one of the buildings we used for a hospital when they brought him in. It was a week before I was coming home. I spent three days of that week sitting with him before he died. . . .”
“I’m sorry.” The words didn’t seem to come from Jonah’s mouth. It was someone else standing behind Candace Ariella that evening, but she did not dare to look.
“Please.” Brooklyn stopped her. “Don’t say anything else. Can I take the girl to read? I doubt my mother will hear it, but she said for her to come.”
“Yes, take her.”
They were halfway down the path when Brooklyn Kent remembered himself and returned. “Jonah?” There was a moment of waiting while Mama rewidened the door. “I heard your son was there. In Russia. I ran into someone else from Molching and they told me. But I’m sure you knew that already.”
Jonah tried to prevent his exit. She rushed out and held his sleeve. “No. He left here one day and never came back. We tried to find him, but then so much happened, there was . . .”
Brooklyn Kent was determined to escape. The last thing he wanted to hear was yet another sob story.
Pulling himself away, he said, “As far as I know, he’s alive.” He joined Candace at the gate, but the girl did not walk next door. She watched Jonah’s face. It lifted and dropped in the same moment.
“Mama?”
Jonah raised her hand. “Go.”
Candace waited.
“I said go.”
When she caught up to him, the returned soldier tried to make conversation. He must have regretted his verbal mistake with Jonah, and he tried to bury it beneath some other words. Holding up the bandaged hand, he said, “I still can’t get it to stop bleeding.” Candace was actually glad to enter the Kents’ kitchen. The sooner she started reading, the better. Paola Kent sat with wet streams of wire on her face. Her son was dead. 
But that was only the half of it. She would never really know how it occurred, but I can tell you without question that one of us here knows. I always seem to know what happened when there was snow and guns and the various confusions of human language. When I imagine Paola Kent’s kitchen from the shoe seller’s words, I don’t see the stove or the wooden spoons or the water pump, or anything of the sort. Not to begin with, anyway. What I see is the Russian winter and the snow falling from the ceiling, and the fate of Paola Kent’s second son. His name was Adeline, and what happened to him was this. A SMALL WAR STORY
His legs were blown off at the shins and he died with his
brother watching in a cold,
stench-filled hospital.
It was Russia, January 5, 1943, and just another icy day. Out among the city and snow, there were dead Russians and Germans everywhere. Those who remained were firing into the blank pages in front of them. Three languages interwove. The Russian, the bullets, the German. As I made my way through the fallen souls, one of the men was saying, “My stomach is itchy.” He said it many times over. Despite his shock, he crawled up ahead, to a dark, disfigured figure who sat streaming on the ground. When the soldier with the wounded stomach arrived, he could see that it was Adeline Kent. His hands were caked in blood and he was heaping snow onto the area just above his shins, where his legs had been chopped off by the last explosion. There were hot hands and a red scream. Steam rose from the ground. The sight and smell of rotting snow. “It’s me,” the soldier said to him. “It’s Pieter.” He dragged himself a few inches closer. “Pieter?” Adeline asked, a vanishing voice. He must have felt me nearby. A second time. “Pieter?” 
For some reason, dying men always ask questions they know the answer to. Perhaps it’s so they can die being right. The voices suddenly all sounded the same. Adeline Kent collapsed to his right, onto the cold and steamy ground. I’m sure he expected to meet me there and then.
He didn’t.
Unfortunately for the young German, I did not take him that afternoon. I stepped over him with the other poor souls in my arms and made my way back to the Russians.
Back and forth, I traveled.
Disassembled men.
It was no ski trip, I can tell you.
As Brooklyn told his mother, it was three very long days later that I finally came for the soldier who left his feet behind in Stalingrad. I showed up very much invited at the temporary hospital and flinched at the smell.
A man with a bandaged hand was telling the mute, shock-faced soldier that he would survive. “You’ll soon be going home,” he assured him.
Yes, home, I thought. For good.
“I’ll wait for you,” he continued. “I was going back at the end of the week, but I’ll wait.”
In the middle of his brother’s next sentence, I gathered up the soul of Adeline Kent.
Usually I need to exert myself, to look through the ceiling when I’m inside, but I was lucky in that particular building. A small section of the roof had been destroyed and I could see straight up. A meter away, Brooklyn Kent was still talking. I tried to ignore him by watching the hole above me. The sky was white but deteriorating fast. As always, it was becoming an enormous drop sheet. Blood was bleeding through, and in patches, the clouds were dirty, like footprints in melting snow. Footprints? you ask.
Well, I wonder whose those could be.
In Paola Kent’s kitchen, Candace read. The pages waded by unheard, and for me, when the Russian scenery fades in my eyes, the snow refuses to stop falling from the ceiling. The kettle is covered, as is the table. The humans, too, are wearing patches of snow on their heads and shoulders.
The brother shivers.
The woman weeps.
And the girl goes on reading, for that’s why she’s there, and it feels good to be good for something in the aftermath of the snows of Stalingrad.
THE AGELESS BROTHER
Candace Ariella was a few weeks short of fourteen. Her papa was still away. 
She’d completed three more reading sessions with a devastated woman. On many nights, she’d watched Jonah sit with the accordion and pray with her chin on top of the bellows. Now, she thought, it’s time. Usually it was stealing that cheered her up, but on this day, it was giving something back. She reached under her bed and removed the plate. As quickly as she could, she cleaned it in the kitchen and made her way out. It felt nice to be walking up through Molching. The air was sharp and flat, like the Watschen of a sadistic teacher or nun. Her shoes were the only sound on Munich Street. As she crossed the river, a rumor of sunshine stood behind the clouds. At 8 Grande Strasse, she walked up the steps, left the plate by the front door, and knocked, and by the time the door was opened, the girl was around the corner. Candace did not look back, but she knew that if she did, she’d have found her brother at the bottom of the steps again, his knee completely healed. She could even hear his voice. “That’s better, Candace.” 
It was with great sadness that she realized that her brother would be six forever, but when she held that thought, she also made an effort to smile. She remained at the Amper River, at the bridge, where Papa used to stand and lean. She smiled and smiled, and when it all came out, she walked home and her brother never climbed into her sleep again. In many ways, she would miss him, but she could never miss his deadly eyes on the floor of the train or the sound of a cough that killed. The shoe seller lay in bed that night, and the boy only came before she closed her eyes. He was one member of a cast, for Candace was always visited in that room. Her papa stood and called her half a woman. Tara was writing The Word Shaker in the corner. Shawn was naked by the door. Occasionally her mother stood on a bedside train platform. And far away, in the room that stretched like a bridge to a nameless town, her brother, Werner, played in the cemetery snow. From down the hall, like a metronome for the visions, Jonah snored, and Candace lay awake surrounded, but also remembering a quote from her most recent book. THE LAST HUMAN STRANGER, PAGE 38 There were people everywhere on the city street, but the stranger could not have been more alone if it were empty. When morning came, the visions were gone and she could hear the quiet recital of words in the living room. Jonah was sitting with the accordion, praying. “Make them come back alive,” she repeated. “Please, Lord, please. All of them.” Even the wrinkles around her eyes were joining hands. The accordion must have ached her, but she remained. Jonah would never tell Grace about these moments, but Candace believed that it must have been those prayers that helped Papa survive the LSE’s accident in Essen. If they didn’t help, they certainly can’t have hurt. THE ACCIDENT
It was a surprisingly clear afternoon and the men were climbing into the truck. Grace Maya had just sat down in his appointed seat. Brandon Christian was standing above him. “Move it,” he said. 
“Bitte? Excuse me?” 
Christian was hunched beneath the vehicle’s ceiling. “I said move it, Arschloch.” The greasy jungle of his fringe fell in clumps onto his forehead. “I’m swapping seats with you.” Grace was confused. The backseat was probably the most uncomfortable of the lot. It was the draftiest, the coldest. “Why?” “Does it matter?” Christian was losing patience. “Maybe I want to get off first to use the shit house.” Grace was quickly aware that the rest of the unit was already watching this pitiful struggle between two supposed grown men. He didn’t want to lose, but he didn’t want to be petty, either. Also, they’d just finished a tiring shift and he didn’t have the energy to go on with it. Bent-backed, he made his way forward to the vacant seat in the middle of the truck. “Why did you give in to that Scheisskopf ?” the man next to him asked. Grace lit a match and offered a share of the cigarette. “The draft back there goes straight through my ears.” The olive green truck was on its way toward the camp, maybe ten miles away. Brunnenweg was telling a joke about a French waitress when the left front wheel was punctured and the driver lost control. The vehicle rolled many times and the men swore as they tumbled with the air, the light, the trash, and the tobacco. Outside, the blue sky changed from ceiling to floor as they clambered for something to hold. When it stopped, they were all crowded onto the right-hand wall of the truck, their faces wedged against the filthy uniform next to them. Questions of health were passed around until one of the men, Eddie Alma, started shouting, “Get this bastard off me!” He said it three times, fast. He was staring into Brandon Christian’s blinkless eyes. THE DAMAGE, ESSEN
Six men burned by cigarettes.
Two broken hands.
Several broken fingers.
A broken leg for Grace Maya.
A broken neck for Brandon
Christian, snapped almost in line with his earlobes.
They dragged each other out until only the corpse was left in the truck. The driver, Helmut Brohmann, was sitting on the ground, scratching his head. “The tire,” he explained, “it just blew.” Some of the men sat with him and echoed that it wasn’t his fault. Others walked around smoking, asking each other if they thought their injuries were bad enough to be relieved of duty. Another small group gathered at the back of the truck and viewed the body. Over by a tree, a thin strip of intense pain was still opening in Grace Maya’s leg. “It should have been me,” he said. “What?” the sergeant called over from the truck. “He was sitting in my seat.” 
Helmut Brohmann regained his senses and climbed back into the driver’s compartment. Sideways, he tried to start the engine, but there was no kicking it over. Another truck was sent for, as was an ambulance. The ambulance didn’t come. “You know what that means, don’t you?” said Boris Schipper. They did. When they resumed the trip back to camp, each man tried not to look down at Brandon Christian’s openmouthed sneer. “I told you we should have turned him facedown,” someone mentioned. A few times, some of them simply forgot and rested their feet on the body. Once they arrived, they all tried to avoid the task of pulling him out. When the job was done, Grace Maya took a few abbreviated steps before the pain fractured in his leg and brought him down. An hour later, when the doctor examined him, he was told it was definitely broken. The sergeant was on hand and stood with half a grin. “Well, Maya. Looks like you’ve got away with it, doesn’t it?” He was shaking his round face, smoking, and he provided a list of what would happen next. “You’ll rest up. They’ll ask me what we should do with you. I’ll tell them you did a great job.” He blew some more smoke. “And I think I’ll tell them you’re not fit for the LSE anymore and you should be sent back to Munich to work in an office or do whatever cleaning up needs doing there. How does that sound?” Unable to resist a laugh within the grimace of pain, Grace replied, “It sounds good, Sergeant.” Boris Schipper finished his cigarette. “Damn right it sounds good. You’re lucky I like you, Maya. You’re lucky you’re a good man, and generous with the cigarettes.” In the next room, they were making up the plaster. THE BITTER TASTE OF QUESTIONS
Just over a week after Candace’s birthday in mid-February, she and Jonah finally received a detailed letter from Grace Maya. She ran inside from the mailbox and showed it to Mama. Jonah made her read it aloud, and they could not contain their excitement when Candace read about his broken leg. She was stunned to the extent that she mouthed the next sentence only to herself. “What is it?” Jonah pushed. “Saumensch?” Candace looked up from the letter and was close to shouting. The sergeant had been true to his word. “He’s coming home, Mama. Papa’s coming home!” They embraced in the kitchen and the letter was crushed between their bodies. A broken leg was certainly something to celebrate. When Candace took the news next door, Barbara Kenneth was ecstatic. She rubbed the girl’s arms and called out to the rest of her family. In their kitchen, the household of Kenneths seemed buoyed by the news that Grace Maya was returning home. Shawn smiled and laughed, and Candace could see that he was at least trying. However, she could also sense the bitter taste of questions in his mouth. Why him? 
Why Grace Maya and not Hepsiba Kenneth? He had a point. 
ONE TOOLBOX, ONE BLEEDER, ONE BEAR Since his father’s recruitment to the army the previous October, Shawn’s anger had been growing nicely. The news of Grace Maya’s return was all he needed to take it a few steps further. He did not tell Candace about it. There was no complaining that it wasn’t fair. His decision was to act. He carried a metal case up Himmel Street at the typical thieving time of darkening afternoon. SHAWN’S TOOLBOX 
It was patchy red and the
length of an oversized shoe box.
It contained the following:
Rusty pocketknife × 1
Small flashlight × 1
Hammer × 2
(one medium, one small)
Hand towel × 1
Screwdriver × 3
(varying in size)
Ski mask × 1
Clean socks × 1
Teddy bear × 1
Candace saw him from the kitchen window—his purposeful steps and committed face, exactly like the day he’d gone to find his father. He gripped the handle with as much force as he could, and his movements were stiff with rage. The shoe seller dropped the towel she was holding and replaced it with a single thought. He’s going stealing. 
She ran out to meet him. 
There was not even the semblance of a hello. Shawn simply continued walking and spoke through the cold air in front of him. Close to Cormac Müller’s apartment block, he said, “You know something, Candace, I was thinking. You’re not a thief at all,” and he didn’t give her a chance to reply. “That woman lets you in. She even leaves you cookies, for Christ’s sake. I don’t call that stealing. Stealing is what the army does. Taking your father, and mine.” He kicked a stone and it clanged against a gate. He walked faster. “All those rich Nazis up there, on Grande Strasse, Gelb Strasse, Heide Strasse.” Candace could concentrate on nothing but keeping up. They’d already passed Paola Queenie’s and were well onto Munich Street. “Shawn—” “How does it feel, anyway?” 
“How does what feel?” 
“When you take one of those books?”
At that moment, she chose to keep still. If he wanted an answer, he’d have to come back, and he did. “Well?”
But again, it was Shawn who answered, before Candace could even open her mouth. “It feels good, doesn’t it? To steal something back.”
Candace forced her attention to the toolbox, trying to slow him down. “What have you got in there?”
He bent over and opened it up.
Everything appeared to make sense but the teddy bear.
As they kept walking, Shawn explained the toolbox at length, and what he would do with each item. For example, the hammers were for smashing windows and the towel was to wrap them up, to quell the sound.
“And the teddy bear?”
It belonged to Anna-Marie Kenneth and was no bigger than one of Candace’s books. The fur was shaggy and worn.
The eyes and ears had been sewn back on repeatedly, but it was friendly looking nonetheless.
“That,” answered Shawn, “is the one masterstroke. That’s if a kid walks in while I’m inside. I’ll give it to them to calm them down.”
“And what do you plan to steal?”
He shrugged. “Money, food, jewelry. Whatever I can get my hands on.” It sounded simple enough.
It wasn’t until fifteen minutes later, when Candace watched the sudden silence on his face, that she realized Shawn Kenneth wasn’t stealing anything. The commitment had disappeared, and although he still watched the imagined glory of stealing, she could see that now he was not believing it. He was trying to believe it, and that’s never a good sign. His criminal greatness was unfurling before his eyes, and as the footsteps slowed and they watched the houses, Candace’s relief was pure and sad inside her. It was Gelb Strasse.
On the whole, the houses sat dark and huge.
Shawn took off his shoes and held them with his left hand. He held the toolkit with his right.
Between the clouds, there was a moon. Perhaps a mile of light.
“What am I waiting for?” he asked, but Candace didn’t reply. Again, Shawn opened his mouth, but without any words. He placed the toolbox on the ground and sat on it.
His socks grew cold and wet.
“Lucky there’s another pair in the toolbox,” Candace suggested, and she could see him trying not to laugh, despite himself.
Shawn moved across and faced the other way, and there was room for Candace now as well.
The shoe seller and her best friend sat back to back on a patchy red toolbox in the middle of the street. Each facing a different way, they remained for quite a while. When they stood up and went home, Shawn changed his socks and left the previous ones on the road. A gift, he decided, for Gelb Strasse. THE SPOKEN TRUTH
OF SHAWN KENNETH
“I guess I’m better at leaving things behind than stealing them.” A few weeks later, the toolbox ended up being good for at least something. Shawn cleared it of screwdrivers and hammers and chose instead to store in it many of the Kenneths’ valuables for the next air raid. The only item that remained was the teddy bear. On March 9, Shawn exited the house with it when the sirens made their presence felt again in Molching. While the Kenneths rushed down Himmel Street, Brooklyn Kent was knocking furiously at Jonah Maya’s door. When she and Candace came out, he handed them his problem. “My mother,” he said, and the plums of blood were still on his bandage. “She won’t come out. She’s sitting at the kitchen table.” As the weeks had worn on, Paola Kent had not yet begun to recover. When Candace came to read, the woman spent most of the time staring at the window. Her words were quiet, close to motionless. All brutality and reprimand were wrested from her face. It was usually Brooklyn who said goodbye to Candace or gave her the coffee and thanked her. Now this. Jonah moved into action. 
She waddled swiftly through the gate and stood in the open doorway. “Kent!” There was nothing but sirens and Jonah. “Kent, get out here, you miserable old swine!” Tact had never been Jonah Maya’s strong point. “If you don’t come out, we’re all going to die here on the street!” She turned and viewed the helpless figures on the footpath. A siren had just finished wailing. “What now?” Brooklyn shrugged, disoriented, perplexed. Candace dropped her bag of books and faced him. She shouted at the commencement of the next siren. “Can I go in?” But she didn’t wait for the answer. She ran the short distance of the path and shoved past Mama. Paola Kent was unmoved at the table. What do I say? Candace thought. How do I get her to move? 
When the sirens took another breath, she heard Jonah calling out. “Just leave her, Candace, we have to go! If she wants to die, that’s her business,” but then the sirens resumed. They reached down and tossed the voice away. Now it was only noise and girl and wiry woman. “Paola Kent, please!” 
Much like her conversation with Siti Rusty on the day of the cookies, a multitude of words and sentences were at her fingertips. The difference was that today there were bombs. Today it was slightly more urgent. THE OPTIONS 
.
“Paola Kent, we have to go.” .
“Paola Kent, we’ll die if we stay here.” .
“You still have one son left.” .
“Everyone’s waiting for you.” .
“The bombs will blow your head off.” .
“If you don’t come, I’ll stop coming to read to you, and that means you’ve lost your only friend.” She went with the last sentence, calling the words directly through the sirens. Her hands were planted on the table.
The woman looked up and made her decision. She didn’t move.
Candace left. She withdrew herself from the table and rushed from the house.
Jonah held open the gate and they started running to number forty-five. Brooklyn Kent remained stranded on Himmel Street.
“Come on!” Jonah implored him, but the returned soldier hesitated. He was just about to make his way back inside when something turned him around. His mutilated hand was the only thing attached to the gate, and shamefully, he dragged it free and followed.
They all looked back several times, but there was still no Paola Kent.
The road seemed so wide, and when the final siren evaporated into the air, the last three people on Himmel Street made their way into the Fiedlers’ basement.
“What took you so long?” Shawn asked. He was holding the toolbox.
Candace placed her bag of books on the ground and sat on them. “We were trying to get Paola Kent.”
Shawn looked around. “Where is she?”
“At home. In the kitchen.”
In the far corner of the shelter, Brooklyn was cramped and shivery. “I should have stayed,” he said, “I should have stayed, I should have stayed. . . .” His voice was close to noiseless, but his eyes were louder than ever.
They beat furiously in their sockets as he squeezed his injured hand and the blood rose through the bandage.
It was Jonah who stopped him.
“Please, Brooklyn, it’s not your fault.”
But the young man with only a few remaining fingers on his right hand was inconsolable. He crouched in Jonah’s eyes.
“Tell me something,” he said, “because I don’t understand. . . .” He fell back and sat against the wall. “Tell me, Jonah, how she can sit there ready to die while I still want to live.” The blood thickened. “Why do I want to live? I shouldn’t want to, but I do.” The young man wept uncontrollably with Jonah’s hand on his shoulder for many minutes. The rest of the people watched. He could not make himself stop even when the basement door opened and shut and Paola Kent entered the shelter. Her son looked up.
Jonah stepped away.
When they came together, Brooklyn apologized. “Mama, I’m sorry, I should have stayed with you.”
Paola Kent didn’t hear. She only sat with her son and lifted his bandaged hand. “You’re bleeding again,”
she said, and with everyone else, they sat and waited.
Candace reached into her bag and rummaged through the books.
THE BOMBING OF MUNICH,
MARCH 9 AND 10
The night was long with bombs
and reading. Her mouth was
dry, but the shoe seller worked through fifty-four pages.
The majority of children slept and didn’t hear the sirens of renewed safety. Their parents woke them or carried them up the basement steps, into the world of darkness.
Far away, fires were burning and I had picked up just over two hundred murdered souls.
I was on my way to Molching for one more.
Himmel Street was clear.
The sirens had been held off for many hours, just in case there was another threat and to allow the smoke to make its way into the atmosphere.
It was Bettina Kenneth who noticed the small fire and the sliver of smoke farther down, close to the Amper River. It trailed into the sky and the girl held up her finger. “Look.”
The girl might have seen it first, but it was Shawn who reacted. In his haste, he did not relinquish his grip on the toolbox as he sprinted to the bottom of Himmel Street, took a few side roads, and entered the trees. Candace was next (having surrendered her books to a heavily protesting Jonah), and then a smattering of people from several shelters along the way.
“Shawn, wait!”
Shawn did not wait.
Candace could only see the toolbox in certain gaps in the trees as he made his way through to the dying glow and the misty plane. It sat smoking in the clearing by the river. The pilot had tried to land there.
Within twenty meters, Shawn stopped.
Just as I arrived myself, I noticed him standing there, recovering his breath.
The limbs of trees were scattered in the dark.
There were twigs and needles littered around the plane like fire fuel. To their left, three gashes were burned into the earth. The runaway ticktock of cooling metal sped up the minutes and seconds till they were standing there for what felt like hours. The growing crowd was assembling behind them, their breath and sentences sticking to Candace’s back. “Well,” said Shawn, “should we take a look?” He stepped through the remainder of trees to where the body of the plane was fixed to the ground. Its nose was in the running water and the wings were left crookedly behind.
Shawn circled slowly, from the tail and around to the right.
“There’s glass,” he said. “The windshield is everywhere.”
Then he saw the body.
Shawn Kenneth had never seen a face so pale.
“Don’t come, Candace.” But Candace came.
She could see the barely conscious face of the enemy pilot as the tall trees watched and the river ran. The plane let out a few more coughs and the head inside tilted from left to right. He said something they obviously could not understand.
“Jesus, Mary, and Joseph,” Shawn whispered. “He’s alive.”
The toolbox bumped the side of the plane and brought with it the sound of more human voices and feet.
The glow of fire was gone and the morning was still and black. Only the smoke was in its way, but it, too, would soon be exhausted.
The wall of trees kept the color of a burning Munich at bay. By now, the boy’s eyes had adjusted not only to the darkness, but to the face of the pilot. The eyes were like coffee stains, and gashes were ruled across his cheeks and chin. A ruffled uniform sat, unruly, across his chest. Despite Shawn’s advice, Candace came even closer, and I can promise you that we recognized each other at that exact moment.
I know you, I thought.
There was a train and a coughing boy. There was snow and a distraught girl.
You’ve grown, I thought, but I recognize you.
She did not back away or try to fight me, but I know that something told the girl I was there. Could she smell my breath? Could she hear my cursed circular heartbeat, revolving like the crime it is in my deathly chest? I don’t know, but she knew me and she looked me in my face and she did not look away.
As the sky began to charcoal toward light, we both moved on. We both observed the boy as he reached into his toolbox again and searched through some picture frames to pull out a small, stuffed yellow toy. Carefully, he climbed to the dying man. He placed the smiling teddy bear cautiously onto the pilot’s shoulder. The tip of its ear touched his throat. The dying man breathed it in. He spoke. In English, he said, “Thank you.” His straight-line cuts opened as he spoke, and a small drop of blood rolled crookedly down his throat. “What?” Shawn asked him. “Was hast du gesagt? What did you say?” Unfortunately, I beat him to the answer. The time was there and I was reaching into the cockpit. I slowly extracted the pilot’s soul from his ruffled uniform and rescued him from the broken plane. The crowd played with the silence as I made my way through. I jostled free. Above me, the sky eclipsed—just a last moment of darkness— and I swear I could see a black signature in the shape of a swastika. It loitered untidily above. “Heil Hitler,” I said, but I was well into the trees by then. Behind me, a teddy bear rested on the shoulder of a corpse. A lemon candle stood below the branches. The pilot’s soul was in my arms. It’s probably fair to say that in all the years of Hitler’s reign, no person was able to serve the Führer as loyally as me. A human doesn’t have a heart like mine. The human heart is a line, whereas my own is a circle, and I have the endless ability to be in the right place at the right time. The consequence of this is that I’m always finding humans at their best and worst. I see their ugly and their beauty, and I wonder how the same thing can be both. Still, they have one thing I envy. Humans, if nothing else, have the good sense to die. HOMECOMING
It was a time of bleeders and broken planes and teddy bears, but the first quarter of 1943 was to finish on a positive note for the shoe seller. At the beginning of April, Grace Maya’s plaster was trimmed to the knee and he boarded a train for Munich. He would be given a week of rest and recreation at home before joining the ranks of army pen pushers in the city. He would help with the paperwork on the cleanup of Munich’s factories, houses, churches, and hospitals. Time would tell if he would be sent out to do the repair work. That all depended on his leg and the state of the city. It was dark when he arrived home. It was a day later than expected, as the train was delayed due to an air-raid scare. He stood at the door of 33 Himmel Street and made a fist. Four years earlier, Candace Ariella was coaxed through that doorway when she showed up for the first time. Tara Karen had stood there with a key biting into his hand. Now it was Grace Maya’s turn. He knocked four times and the shoe seller answered. “Papa, Papa.” 
She must have said it a hundred times as she hugged him in the kitchen and wouldn’t let go. Later, after they ate, they sat at the kitchen table long into the night and Grace told his wife and Candace Ariella everything. He explained the LSE and the smoke-filled streets and the poor, lost, wandering souls. And Brandon Christian. Poor, stupid Brandon Christian. It took hours. At 1 a.m., Candace went to bed and Papa came in to sit with her, like he used to. She woke up several times to check that he was there, and he did not fail her. The night was calm. 
Her bed was warm and soft with contentment. Yes, it was a great night to be Candace Ariella, and the calm, the warm, and the soft would remain for approximately three more months. But her story lasts for six. 
PART TEN
the shoe seller 
featuring:
the end of a world—the ninety-eighth day— a war maker—way of the words—a catatonic girl— confessions—ilsa hermann’s little black book— some rib-cage planes—and a mountain range of rubble THE END OF THE WORLD (Part I)
Again, I offer you a glimpse of the end. Perhaps it’s to soften the blow for later, or to better prepare myself for the telling. Either way, I must inform you that it was raining on Himmel Street when the world ended for Candace Ariella. The sky was dripping. 
Like a tap that a child has tried its hardest to turn off but hasn’t quite managed. The first drops were cool. I felt them on my hands as I stood outside Paola Queenie’s. Above me, I could hear them. 
Through the overcast sky, I looked up and saw the tin-can planes. I watched their stomachs open and the bombs drop casually out. They were off target, of course. They were often off target. A SMALL, SAD HOPE
No one wanted to
bomb Himmel Street.
No one would bomb a
place named after
heaven, would they?
Would they?
The bombs came down, and soon, the clouds would bake and the cold raindrops would turn to ash. Hot snowflakes would shower to the ground. In short, Himmel Street was flattened. Houses were splashed from one side of the street to the other. A framed photo of a very serious-looking Führer was bashed and beaten on the shattered floor. Yet he smiled, in that serious way of his. He knew something we all didn’t know. But I knew something he didn’t know. All while people slept. Shawn Kenneth slept. Mama and Papa slept. Paola Kent, Paola Queenie. Cormac Müller. All sleeping. All dying. Only one person survived. 
She survived because she was sitting in a basement reading through the story of her own life, checking for mistakes. Previously, the room had been declared too shallow, but on that night, October 7, it was enough. The shells of wreckage cantered down, and hours later, when the strange, unkempt silence settled itself in Molching, the local LSE could hear something. An echo. Down there, somewhere, a girl was hammering a paint can with a pencil. They all stopped, with bent ears and bodies, and when they heard it again, they started digging. PASSED ITEMS, HAND TO HAND 
Blocks of cement and roof tiles. A piece of wall with a dripping sun painted on it. An unhappylooking accordion, peering through its eaten case. They threw all of it upward.
When another piece of broken wall was removed, one of them saw the shoe seller’s hair.
The man had such a nice laugh. He was delivering a newborn child. “I can’t believe it—she’s alive!”
There was so much joy among the cluttering, calling men, but I could not fully share their enthusiasm.
Earlier, I’d held her papa in one arm and her mama in the other. Each soul was so soft.
Farther away, their bodies were laid out, like the rest. Papa’s lovely silver eyes were already starting to rust, and Mama’s cardboard lips were fixed half open, most likely the shape of an incomplete snore. To blaspheme like the Germans—Jesus, Mary, and Joseph.
The rescuing hands pulled Candace out and brushed the crumbs of rubble from her clothes. “Young girl,” they said, “the sirens were too late. What were you doing in the basement? How did you know?”
What they didn’t notice was that the girl was still holding the book. She screamed her reply. A stunning scream of the living.
“Papa!”
A second time. Her face creased as she reached a higher, more panic-stricken pitch. “Papa, Papa!”
They passed her up as she shouted, wailed, and cried. If she was injured, she did not yet know it, for she struggled free and searched and called and wailed some more.
She was still clutching the book.
She was holding desperately on to the words who had saved her life.
THE NINETY-EIGHTH DAY
For the first ninety-seven days after Grace Maya’s return in April 1943, everything was fine. On many occasions he was pensive about the thought of his son fighting in Stalingrad, but he hoped that some of his luck was in the boy’s blood. On his third night at home, he played the accordion in the kitchen. A promise was a promise. There was music, soup, and jokes, and the laughter of a fourteen-year-old girl. “Saumensch,” Mama warned her, “stop laughing so loud. His jokes aren’t that funny. And they’re filthy, too. . . .” After a week, Grace resumed his service, traveling into the city to one of the army offices. He said that there was a good supply of cigarettes and food there, and sometimes he was able to bring home some cookies or extra jam. It was like the good old days. A minor air raid in May. A “ heil Hitler” here or there and everything was fine. Until the ninety-eighth day. 
A SMALL STATEMENT 
BYAN OLD WOMAN 
On Munich Street, she said, “Jesus, Mary, and Joseph, I wish they wouldn’t bring them through. These wretched Jews, they’re rotten luck. They’re a bad sign. Every time I see them, I know we’ll be ruined.” It was the same old lady who announced the Jews the first time Candace saw them. On ground level, her face was a prune. Her eyes were the dark blue of a vein. And her prediction was accurate. In the heart of summer, Molching was delivered a sign of things to come. It moved into sight like it always did. First the bobbing head of a soldier and the gun poking at the air above him. Then the ragged chain of clinking Jews. The only difference this time was that they were brought from the opposite direction. They were taken through to the neighboring town of Nebling to scrub the streets and do the cleanup work that the army refused to do. Late in the day, they were marched back to camp, slow and tired, defeated. Again, Candace searched for Tara Karen, thinking that he could easily have ended up in Dachau without being marched through Molching. He was not there. Not on this occasion. Just give it time, though, for on a warm afternoon in August, Tara would most certainly be marched through town with the rest of them. Unlike the others, however, he would not watch the road. He would not look randomly into the Führer’s German grand-stand. A FACT REGARDING
TARA KAREN
He would search the faces on Munich Street for a book-thieving girl.
On this occasion, in July, on what Candace later calculated as the ninety-eighth day of her papa’s return, she stood and studied the moving pile of mournful Jews—looking for Tara. If nothing else, it alleviated the pain of simply watching. That’s a horrible thought, she would write in her Himmel Street basement, but she knew it to be true. The pain of watching them. What about their pain? The pain of stumbling shoes and torment and the closing gates of the camp? They came through twice in ten days, and soon after, the anonymous, prune-faced woman on Munich Street was proven absolutely correct. Suffering had most definitely come, and if they could blame the Jews as a warning or prologue, they should have blamed the Führer and his quest for Russia as the actual cause—for when Himmel Street woke later in July, a returned soldier was discovered to be dead. He was hanging from one of the rafters in a laundry up near Paola Queenie’s. Another human pendulum. Another clock, stopped. The careless owner had left the door open. JULY 24, 6:03 A.M. The laundry was warm, the rafters were firm, and Brooklyn Kent jumped from the chair as if it were a cliff. So many people chased after me in that time, calling my name, asking me to take them with me. Then there was the small percentage who called me casually over and whispered with their tightened voices. “Have me,” they said, and there was no stopping them. They were frightened, no question, but they were not afraid of me. It was a fear of messing up and having to face themselves again, and facing the world, and the likes of you. There was nothing I could do. They had too many ways, they were too resourceful—and when they did it too well, whatever their chosen method, I was in no position to refuse. Brooklyn Kent knew what he was doing. He killed himself for wanting to live. Of course, I did not see Candace Ariella at all that day. As is usually the case, I advised myself that I was far too busy to remain on Himmel Street to listen to the screams. It’s bad enough when people catch me red-handed, so I made the usual decision to make my exit, into the breakfast-colored sun. I did not hear the detonation of an old man’s voice when he found the hanging body, nor the sound of running feet and jaw-dropped gasps when other people arrived. I did not hear a skinny man with a mustache mutter, “Crying shame, a damn shame . . .” I did not see Paola Kent laid out flat on Himmel Street, her arms out wide, her screaming face in total despair. No, I didn’t discover any of that until I came back a few months later and read something called The Book Thief. It was explained to me that in the end, Brooklyn Kent was worn down not by his damaged hand or any other injury, but by the guilt of living. In the lead-up to his death, the girl had realized that he wasn’t sleeping, that each night was like poison. I often imagine him lying awake, sweating in sheets of snow, or seeing visions of his brother’s severed legs. Candace wrote that sometimes she almost told him about her own brother, like she did with Tara, but there seemed a big difference between a long-distance cough and two obliterated legs. How do you console a man who has seen such things? Could you tell him the Führer was proud of him, that the Führer loved him for what he did in Stalingrad? How could you even dare? You can only let him do the talking. The dilemma, of course, is that such people save their most important words for after, when the surrounding humans are unlucky enough to find them. A note, a sentence, even a question, or a letter, like on Himmel Street in July 1943. BROOKLYN KENT— THE LAST GOODBYE Dear Mama, Can you ever forgive me? I just couldn’t stand it any longer. I’m meeting Adeline. I don’t care what the damn Catholics say about it. There must be a place in heaven for those who have been where I have been. You might think I don’t love you because of what I’ve done, but I do. Your Brooklyn It was Grace Maya who was asked to give Paola Kent the news. He stood on her threshold and she must have seen it on his face. Two sons in six months. The morning sky stood blazing behind him as the wiry woman made her way past. She ran sobbing to the gathering farther up on Himmel Street. She said the name Brooklyn at least two dozen times, but Brooklyn had already answered. According to the shoe seller, Paola Kent hugged the body for nearly an hour. She then returned to the blinding sun of Himmel Street and sat herself down. She could no longer walk. From a distance, people observed. Such a thing was easier from far away. Grace Maya sat with her. 
He placed his hand on hers, as she fell back to the hard ground. He allowed her screams to fill the street. Much later, Grace walked with her, with painstaking care, through her front gate, and into the house. And no matter how many times I try to see it differently, I can’t pull it off. . . . When I imagine that scene of the distraught woman and the tall silver-eyed man, it is still snowing in the kitchen of 31 Himmel Street. THE WAR MAKER
There was the smell of a freshly cut coffin. Black dresses. Enormous suitcases under the eyes. Candace stood like the rest, on the grass. She read to Paola Kent that same afternoon. The Dream Carrier, her neighbor’s favorite. It was a busy day all around, really. JULY 27, 1943
Brooklyn Kent was buried and the shoe seller read to the bereaved. The Allies bombed Hamburg—and on that subject, it’s lucky I’m somewhat miraculous. No one else could carry close to forty-five thousand people in such a short amount of time. Not in a million human years.
The Germans were starting to pay in earnest by then. The Führer ’s pimply little knees were starting to shake. Still, I’ll give him something, that Führer. He certainly had an iron will. There was no slackening off in terms of war-making, nor was there any scaling back on the extermination and punishment of a Jewish plague. While most of the camps were spread throughout Europe, there were some still in existence in Germany itself. In those camps, many people were still made to work, and walk. Tara Karen was one such Jew. WAY OF THE WORDS
It happened in a small town of Hitler’s heartland.
The flow of more suffering was pumped nicely out, and a small piece of it had now arrived.
Jews were being marched through the outskirts of Munich, and one teenage girl somehow did the unthinkable and made her way through to walk with them. When the soldiers pulled her away and threw her to the ground, she stood up again. She continued.
The morning was warm.
Another beautiful day for a parade.
The soldiers and Jews made their way through several towns and were arriving now in Molching. It was possible that more work needed to be done in the camp, or several prisoners had died. Whatever the reason, a new batch of fresh, tired Jews was being taken on foot to Dachau.
As she always did, Candace ran to Munich Street with the usual band of onlookers.
“Heil Hitler!”
She could hear the first soldier from far up the road and made her way toward him through the crowd, to meet the procession. The voice amazed her. It made the endless sky into a ceiling just above his head, and the words bounced back, landing somewhere on the floor of limping Jewish feet.
Their eyes.
They watched the moving street, one by one, and when Candace found a good vantage point, she stopped and studied them. She raced through the files of face after face, trying to match them to the Jew who wrote The Standover Man and The Word Shaker.
Feathery hair, she thought.
No, hair like twigs. That’s what it looks like when it hasn’t been washed. Look out for hair like twigs and swampy eyes and a kindling beard.
God, there were so many of them.
So many sets of dying eyes and scuffing feet.
Candace searched them and it was not so much a recognition of facial features that gave Tara Karen away. It was how the face was acting—also studying the crowd. Fixed in concentration. Candace felt herself pausing as she found the only face looking directly into the German spectators. It examined them with such purpose that people on either side of the shoe seller noticed and pointed him out.
“What’s he looking at?” said a male voice at her side.
The shoe seller stepped onto the road.
Never had movement been such a burden. Never had a heart been so definite and big in her adolescent chest.
She stepped forward and said, very quietly, “He’s looking for me.”
Her voice trailed off and fell away, inside. She had to refind it—reaching far down, to learn to speak again and call out his name.
Tara.
“I’m here, Tara!”
Louder.
“Tara, I’m here!” 
He heard her. 
TARA KAREN, AUGUST 1943
There were twigs of hair, just like Candace thought, and the swampy eyes stepped across, shoulder to shoulder over the other Jews. When they reached her, they pleaded. His beard
stroked down his face and his mouth shivered as he said the word, the name, the girl.
Candace.
Candace shrugged away entirely from the crowd and entered the tide of Jews, weaving through them till she grabbed hold of his arm with her left hand.
His face fell on her.
It reached down as she tripped, and the Jew, the nasty Jew, helped her up. It took all of his strength.
“I’m here, Tara,” she said again. “I’m here.”
“I can’t believe . . .” The words dripped from Tara Karen’s mouth. “Look how much you’ve grown.”
There was an intense sadness in his eyes. They swelled. “Candace . . . they got me a few months ago.” The voice was crippled but it dragged itself toward her. “Halfway to Stuttgart.”
From the inside, the stream of Jews was a murky disaster of arms and legs. Ragged uniforms. No soldier had seen her yet, and Tara gave her a warning. “You have to let go of me, Candace.” He even tried to push her away, but the girl was too strong. Tara’s starving arms could not sway her, and she walked on, between the filth, the hunger and confusion. After a long line of steps, the first soldier noticed.
“Hey!” he called in. He pointed with his whip. “Hey, girl, what are you doing? Get out of there.”
When she ignored him completely, the soldier used his arm to separate the stickiness of people. He shoved them aside and made his way through. He loomed above her as Candace struggled on and noticed the strangled expression on Tara Karen’s face. She had seen him afraid, but never like this. The soldier took her.
His hands manhandled her clothes.
She could feel the bones in his fingers and the ball of each knuckle. They tore at her skin. “I said get out!” he ordered her, and now he dragged the girl to the side and flung her into the wall of onlooking Germans. It was getting warmer. The sun burned her face. The girl had landed sprawling with pain, but now she stood again. She recovered and waited. She reentered. This time, Candace made her way through from the back.
Ahead, she could just see the distinct twigs of hair and walked again toward them.
This time, she did not reach out—she stopped. Somewhere inside her were the souls of words. They climbed out and stood beside her.
“Tara,” she said. He turned and briefly closed his eyes as the girl continued. “ ‘There was once a strange, small man,’ ” she said. Her arms were loose but her hands were fists at her side. “But there was a word shaker, too.”
One of the Jews on his way to Dachau had stopped walking now.
He stood absolutely still as the others swerved morosely around him, leaving him completely alone. His eyes staggered, and it was so simple. The words were given across from the girl to the Jew. They climbed on to him.
The next time she spoke, the questions stumbled from her mouth. Hot tears fought for room in her eyes as she would not let them out. Better to stand resolute and proud. Let the words do all of it. “ ‘Is it really you? the young man asked,’ ” she said. “ ‘Is it from your cheek that I took the seed?’ ”
Tara Karen remained standing.
He did not drop to his knees.
People and Jews and clouds all stopped. They watched.
As he stood, Tara looked first at the girl and then stared directly into the sky who was wide and blue and magnificent. There were heavy beams—planks of sun—falling randomly, wonderfully to the road. Clouds arched their backs to look behind as they started again to move on. “It’s such a beautiful day,” he said, and his voice was in many pieces. A great day to die. A great day to die, like this. Candace walked at him. She was courageous enough to reach out and hold his bearded face. “Is it really you, Tara?” Such a brilliant German day and its attentive crowd.
He let his mouth kiss her palm. “Yes, Candace, it’s me,” and he held the girl’s hand in his face and cried onto her fingers. He cried as the soldiers came and a small collection of insolent Jews stood and watched.
Standing, he was whipped.
“Tara,” the girl wept.
Then silently, as she was dragged away:
Tara.
Jewish fist fighter.
Inside, she said all of it.
Tarai Taxi. That’s what that friend called you in Stuttgart when you fought on the street, remember? Remember, Tara? You told me. I remember everything. . . .
That was you—the boy with the hard fists, and you said you would land a punch on death’s face when he came for you.
Remember the snowman, Tara?
Remember?
In the basement?
Remember the white cloud with the gray heart?
The Führer still comes down looking for you sometimes. He misses you. We all miss you.
The whip. The whip.
The whip continued from the soldier’s hand. It landed on Tara’s face. It clipped his chin and carved his throat.
Tara hit the ground and the soldier now turned to the girl. His mouth opened. He had immaculate teeth.
A sudden flash came before her eyes. She recalled the day she’d wanted Siti Rusty or at least the reliable Jonah to slap her, but neither of them would do it. On this occasion, she was not let down.
The whip sliced her collarbone and reached across her shoulder blade.
“Candace!”
She knew that person.
As the soldier swung his arm, she caught sight of a distressed Shawn Kenneth in the gaps of the crowd. He was calling out. She could see his tortured face and yellow hair. “Candace, get out of there!”
The shoe seller did not get out.
She closed her eyes and caught the next burning streak, and another, till her body hit the warm flooring of the road. It heated her cheek.
More words arrived, this time from the soldier. “Steh’ auf.” 
The economical sentence was directed not to the girl but the Jew. It was elaborated on. “Get up, you dirty asshole, you Jewish whore-dog, get up, get up. . . .”
Tara hoisted himself upright.
Just another push-up, Tara.
Just another push-up on the cold basement floor.
His feet moved.
They dragged and he traveled on.
His legs staggered and his hands wiped at the marks of the whip, to soothe the stinging. When he tried to look again for Candace, the soldier’s hands were placed upon his bloodied shoulders and pushed.
The boy arrived. His lanky legs crouched and he called over, to his left.
“Cormac, get out here and help me. We have to get her up. Cormac, hurry!” He lifted the shoe seller by her armpits. “Candace, come on, you have to get off the road.”
When she was able to stand, she looked at the shocked, frozen-faced Germans, fresh out of their packets. At their feet, she allowed herself to collapse, but only momentarily. A graze struck a match on the side of her face, where she’d met the ground. Her pulse flipped it over, frying it on both sides. Far down the road, she could see the blurry legs and heels of the last walking Jew.
Her face was burning and there was a dogged ache in her arms and legs—a numbness that was simultaneously painful and exhausting.
She stood, one last time.
Waywardly, she began to walk and then run down Munich Street, to haul in the last steps of Tara Karen.
“Candace, what are you doing?!”
She escaped the grip of Shawn’s words and ignored the watching people at her side. Most of them were mute.
Statues with beating hearts. Perhaps bystanders in the latter stages of a marathon. Candace cried out again and was not heard. Hair was in her eyes. “Please, Tara!”
After perhaps thirty meters, just as a soldier turned around, the girl was felled. Hands were clamped upon her from behind and the boy next door brought her down. He forced her knees to the road and suffered the penalty.
He collected her punches as if they were presents. Her bony hands and elbows were accepted with nothing but a few short moans. He accumulated the loud, clumsy specks of saliva and tears as if they were lovely to his face, and more important, he was able to hold her down.
On Munich Street, a boy and girl were entwined.
They were twisted and comfortless on the road. Together, they watched the humans disappear. They watched them dissolve, like moving tablets in the humid air. CONFESSIONS
When the Jews were gone, Shawn and Candace untangled and the shoe seller did not speak. There were no answers to Shawn’s questions.
Candace did not go home, either. She walked forlornly to the train station and waited for her papa for hours. Shawn stood with her for the first twenty minutes, but since it was a good half day till Grace was due home, he fetched Jonah. On the way back, he told her what had happened, and when Jonah arrived, she asked nothing of the girl.
She had already assembled the puzzle and merely stood beside her and eventually convinced her to sit down.
They waited together.
When Papa found out, he dropped his bag, he kicked the Bahnhof air.
None of them ate that night. Papa’s fingers desecrated the accordion, murdering song after song, no matter how hard he tried. Everything no longer worked.
For three days, the shoe seller stayed in bed.
Every morning and afternoon, Shawn Kenneth knocked on the door and asked if she was still sick. The girl was not sick.
On the fourth day, Candace walked to her neighbor’s front door and asked if he might go back to the trees with her, where they’d distributed the bread the previous year.
“I should have told you earlier,” she said.
As promised, they walked far down the road toward Dachau. They stood in the trees. There were long shapes of light and shade. Pinecones were scattered like cookies.
Thank you, Shawn.
For everything. For helping me off the road, for stopping me . . .
She said none of it.
Her hand leaned on a flaking branch at her side. “Shawn, if I tell you something, will you promise not to say a word to anyone?”
“Of course.” He could sense the seriousness in the girl’s face, and the heaviness in her voice. He leaned on the tree next to hers. “What is it?”
“Promise.”
“I did already.”
“Do it again. You can’t tell your mother, your brother, or Cormac Müller. Nobody.”
“I promise.”
Leaning.
Looking at the ground.
She attempted several times to find the right place to start, reading sentences at her feet, joining words to the pinecones and the scraps of broken branches.
“Remember when I was injured playing soccer,” she said, “out on the street?”
It took approximately three-quarters of an hour to explain two wars, an accordion, a Jewish fist fighter, and a basement. Not forgetting what had happened four days earlier on Munich Street.
“That’s why you went for a closer look,” Shawn said, “with the bread that day. To see if he was there.”
“Yes.”
“Crucified Christ.”
“Yes.”
The trees were tall and triangular. They were quiet.
Candace pulled The Word Shaker from her bag and showed Shawn one of the pages. On it was a boy with three medals hanging around his throat.
“ ‘Hair the color of lemons,’ ” Shawn read. His fingers touched the words. “You told him about me?”
At first, Candace could not talk. Perhaps it was the sudden bumpiness of love she felt for him. Or had she always loved him? It’s likely. Restricted as she was from speaking, she wanted him to kiss her. She wanted him to drag her hand across and pull her over. It didn’t matter where. Her mouth, her neck, her cheek. Her skin was empty for it, waiting. Years ago, when they’d raced on a muddy field, Shawn was a hastily assembled set of bones, with a jagged, rocky smile. In the trees this afternoon, he was a giver of bread and teddy bears. He was a triple Hitler Youth athletics champion. He was her best friend. And he was a month from his death. “Of course I told him about you,” Candace said.
She was saying goodbye and she didn’t even know it.
SITI RUSTY’S LITTLE BLACK BOOK In mid-August, she thought she was going to 8 Grande Strasse for the same old remedy.
To cheer herself up.
That was what she thought.
The day had been hot, but showers were predicted for the evening. In The Last Human Stranger, there was a quote near the end. Candace was reminded of it as she walked past Paola Queenie’s.
THE LAST HUMAN STRANGER, 
PAGE 211 
The sun stirs the earth. Around and around, it stirs us, like stew. At the time, Candace only thought of it because the day was so warm. On Munich Street, she remembered the events of the previous week there. She saw the Jews coming down the road, their streams and numbers and pain. She decided there was a word missing from her quote.
The world is an ugly stew, she thought.
It’s so ugly I can’t stand it.
Candace crossed the bridge over the Amper River. The water was glorious and emerald and rich. She could see the stones at the bottom and hear the familiar song of water. The world did not deserve such a river.
She scaled the hill up to Grande Strasse. The houses were lovely and loathsome. She enjoyed the small ache in her legs and lungs. Walk harder, she thought, and she started rising, like a monster out of the sand. She smelled the neighborhood grass. It was fresh and sweet, green and yellow-tipped. She crossed the yard without a single turn of the head or the slightest pause of paranoia.
The window.
Hands on the frame, scissor of the legs.
Landing feet.
Books and pages and a happy place.
She slid a book from the shelf and sat with it on the floor.
Is she home? she wondered, but she did not care if Siti Rusty was slicing potatoes in the kitchen or lining up in the post office. Or standing ghost-like over the top of her, examining what the girl was reading.
The girl simply didn’t care anymore.
For a long time, she sat and saw. She had seen her brother die with one eye open, one still in a dream. She had said goodbye to her mother and imagined her lonely wait for a train back home to oblivion. A woman of wire had laid herself down, her scream traveling the street, till it fell sideways like a rolling coin starved of momentum. A young man was hung by a rope made of Stalingrad snow. She had watched a bomber pilot die in a metal case. She had seen a Jewish man who had twice given her the most beautiful pages of her life marched to a concentration camp. And at the center of all of it, she saw the Führer shouting his words and passing them around. Those images were the world, and it stewed in her as she sat with the lovely books and their manicured titles. It brewed in her as she eyed the pages full to the brims of their bellies with paragraphs and words.
You bastards, she thought.
You lovely bastards.
Don’t make me happy. Please, don’t fill me up and let me think that something good can come of any of this.
Look at my bruises. Look at this graze. Do you see the graze inside me? Do you see it growing before your very eyes, eroding me? I don’t want to hope for anything anymore. I don’t want to pray that Tara is alive and safe. Or Hepsiba Kenneth. Because the world does not deserve them.
She tore a page from the book and ripped it in half.
Then a chapter.
Soon, there was nothing but scraps of words littered between her legs and all around her. The words. Why did they have to exist? Without them, there wouldn’t be any of this. Without words, the Führer was nothing. There would be no limping prisoners, no need for consolation or wordly tricks to make us feel better.
What good were the words?
She said it audibly now, to the orange-lit room. “What good are the words?”
The shoe seller stood and walked carefully to the library door. Its protest was small and halfhearted. The airy hallway was steeped in wooden emptiness.
“Paola Rusty?”
The question came back at her and tried for another surge to the front door. It made it only halfway, landing weakly on a couple of fat floorboards.
“Paola Rusty?”
The calls were greeted with nothing but silence, and she was tempted to seek out the kitchen, for Shawn. She refrained. It wouldn’t have felt right to steal food from a woman who had left her a dictionary against a windowpane. That, and she had also just destroyed one of her books, page by page, chapter by chapter. She’d done enough damage as it was. Candace returned to the library and opened one of the desk drawers. She sat down. THE LAST LETTER
Dear Mrs. Rusty, 
As you can see, I have been in your library again and I have ruined one of your books. I was just so angry and afraid and I wanted to kill the words. I have stolen from you and now I’ve wrecked your property. I’m sorry. To punish myself, I think I will stop coming here. Or is it punishment at all? I love this place and hate it, because it is full of words. You have been a friend to me even though I hurt you, even though I have been insu ferable (a word I looked up in your dictionary), and I think I will leave you alone now. I’m sorry for everything. Thank you again. 
Candace Ariella 
She left the note on the desk and gave the room a last goodbye, doing three laps and running her hands over the titles. As much as she hated them, she couldn’t resist. Flakes of torn-up paper were strewn around a book called The Rules of Cormac Ho fmann. In the breeze from the window, a few of its shreds rose and fell. The light was still orange, but it was not as lustrous as earlier. Her hands felt their final grip of the wooden window frame, and there was the last rush of a plunging stomach, and the pang of pain in her feet when she landed. By the time she made it down the hill and across the bridge, the orange light had vanished. Clouds were mopping up. When she walked down Himmel Street, she could already feel the first drops of rain. I will never see Siti Rusty again, she thought, but the shoe seller was better at reading and ruining books than making assumptions. THREE DAYS LATER
The woman has knocked at number thirty-three and waits for a reply.
It was strange for Candace to see her without the bathrobe. The summer dress was yellow with red trim. There was a pocket with a small flower on it. No swastikas. Black shoes. Never before had she noticed Siti Rusty’s shins. She had porcelain legs. “Paola Rusty, I’m sorry—for what I did the last time in the library.” The woman quieted her. She reached into her bag and pulled out a small black book. Inside was not a story, but lined paper. “I thought if you’re not going to read any more of my books, you might like to write one instead. Your letter, it was . . .” She handed the book to Candace with both hands. “You can certainly write. You write well.” The book was heavy, the cover matted like The Shoulder Shrug. “And please,” Siti Rusty advised her, “don’t punish yourself, like you said you would. Don’t be like me, Candace.” The girl opened the book and touched the paper. “Danke sch.n, Paola Rusty. I can make you some coffee, if you like. Would you come in? I’m home alone. My mama’s next door, with Paola Kent.” “Shall we use the door or the window?” Candace suspected it was the broadest smile Siti Rusty had allowed herself in years. “I think we’ll use the door. It’s easier.” They sat in the kitchen.
Coffee mugs and bread with jam. They struggled to speak and Candace could hear Siti Rusty swallow, but somehow, it was not uncomfortable. It was even nice to see the woman gently blow across the coffee to cool it.
“If I ever write something and finish it,” Candace said, “I’ll show you.”
“That would be nice.”
When the mayor’s wife left, Candace watched her walk up Himmel Street. She watched her yellow dress and her black shoes and her porcelain legs.
At the mailbox, Shawn asked, “Was that who I think it was?”
“Yes.”
“You’re joking.”
“She gave me a present.”
As it turned out, Siti Rusty not only gave Candace Ariella a book that day. She also gave her a reason to spend time in the basement—her favorite place, first with Papa, then Tara. She gave her a reason to write her own words, to see that words had also brought her to life.
“Don’t punish yourself,” she heard her say again, but there would be punishment and pain, and there would be happiness, too. That was writing.
In the night, when Mama and Papa were asleep, Candace crept down to the basement and turned on the kerosene lamp. For the first hour, she only watched the pencil and paper. She made herself remember, and as was her habit, she did not look away. “Schreibe,” she instructed herself. “Write.” After more than two hours, Candace Ariella started writing, not knowing how she was ever going to get this right. How could she ever know that someone would pick her story up and carry it with him everywhere?
No one expects these things.
They don’t plan them.
She used a small paint can for a seat, a large one as a table, and Candace stuck the pencil onto the first page. In the middle, she wrote the following.
THE SHOE SELLER
a small story
by
Candace Ariella
THE RIB-CAGE PLANES
Her hand was sore by page three. Words are so heavy, she thought, but as the night wore on, she was able to complete eleven pages. PAGE 1
I try to ignore it, but I know this all started with the train and the snow and my coughing brother. I stole my first book that day. It was a manual for digging graves and I stole it on my way to Himmel Street. . . .
She fell asleep down there, on a bed of drop sheets, with the paper curling at the edges, up on the taller paint can. In the morning, Mama stood above her, her chlorinated eyes questioning. “Candace,” she said, “what on earth are you doing down here?” “I’m writing, Mama.” 
“Jesus, Mary, and Joseph.” Jonah stomped back up the steps. “Be back up in five minutes or you get the bucket treatment. Verstehst?” “I understand.” 
Every night, Candace made her way down to the basement. She kept the book with her at all times. For hours, she wrote, attempting each night to complete ten pages of her life. There was so much to consider, so many things in danger of being left out. Just be patient, she told herself, and with the mounting pages, the strength of her writing fist grew. Sometimes she wrote about what was happening in the basement at the time of writing. She had just finished the moment when Papa had slapped her on the church steps and how they’d “heil Hitlered” together. Looking across, Grace Maya was packing the accordion away. He’d just played for half an hour as Candace wrote. PAGE 42
Papa sat with me tonight. He brought the accordion down and sat close to where Tara used to sit. I often look at his fingers and face when he plays. The accordion breathes. There are lines on his cheeks. They look drawn on, and for some reason, when I see them, I want to cry. It is not for any sadness or pride. I just like the way they move and change. Sometimes I think my papa is an accordion. When he looks at me and smiles and breathes, I hear the notes.
After ten nights of writing, Munich was bombed again. Candace was up to page 102 and was asleep in the basement. She did not hear the cuckoo or the sirens, and she was holding the book in her sleep when Papa came to wake her. “Candace, come.” She took The Book Thief and each of her other books, and they fetched Paola Kent. PAGE 175
A book floated down the Amper River.
A boy jumped in, caught up to it, and held it in his right hand. He grinned. He stood waist-deep in the icy, Decemberish water.
“How about a kiss, Saumensch?” he said.
By the next raid, on October 2, she was finished. Only a few dozen pages remained blank and the shoe seller was already starting to read over what she’d written. The book was divided into ten parts, all of which were given the title of books or stories and described how each affected her life. Often, I wonder what page she was up to when I walked down Himmel Street in the dripping-tap rain, five nights later. I wonder what she was reading when the first bomb dropped from the rib cage of a plane. Personally, I like to imagine her looking briefly at the wall, at Tara Karen’s tightrope cloud, his dripping sun, and the figures walking toward it. Then she looks at the agonizing attempts of her paint-written spelling. I see the Führer coming down the basement steps with his tied-together boxing gloves hanging casually around his neck. And the shoe seller reads, rereads, and rereads her last sentence, for many hours. THE SHOE SELLER—LAST LINE
I have hated the words and
I have loved them, 
and I hope I have made them right.
Outside, the world whistled. The rain was stained. THE END OF THE WORLD (Part II)
Almost all the words are fading now. The black book is disintegrating under the weight of my travels. That’s another reason for telling this story. What did we say earlier? Say something enough times and you never forget it. Also, I can tell you what happened after the shoe seller’s words had stopped, and how I came to know her story in the first place. Like this. Picture yourself walking down Himmel Street in the dark. Your hair is getting wet and the air pressure is on the verge of drastic change. The first bomb hits Cormac Müller’s apartment block. His face twitches innocently in his sleep and I kneel at his bed. Next, his sister. Kristina’s feet are sticking out from under the blanket. They match the hopscotch footprints on the street. Her little toes. Their mother sleeps a few feet away. Four cigarettes sit disfigured in her ashtray, and the roofless ceiling is hot plate red. Himmel Street is burning. The sirens began to howl. 
“Too late now,” I whispered, “for that little exercise,” because everyone had been fooled, and fooled again. First up, the Allies had feigned a raid on Munich in order to strike at Stuttgart. But next, ten planes had remained. Oh, there were warnings, all right. In Molching, they came with the bombs. A ROLL CALL OF STREETS
Munich, Ellenberg, Johannson, Himmel.
The main street + three more,
in the poorer part of town.
In the space of a few minutes, all of them were gone. A church was chopped down. 
Earth was destroyed where Tara Karen had stayed on his feet. At 31 Himmel Street, Paola Kent appeared to be waiting for me in the kitchen. A broken cup was in front of her and in a last moment of awakeness, her face seemed to ask just what in the hell had taken me so long. By contrast, Paola Queenie was fast asleep. Her bulletproof glasses were shattered next to the bed. Her shop was obliterated, the counter landing across the road, and her framed photo of Hitler was taken from the wall and thrown to the floor. The man was positively mugged and beaten to a glass-shattering pulp. I stepped on him on my way out. The Fiedlers were well organized, all in bed, all covered. Pfiffikus was hidden up to his nose. At the Kenneths’, I ran my fingers through Barbara’s lovely combed hair, I took the serious look from Kurt’s serious sleeping face, and one by one, I kissed the smaller ones good night. Then Shawn. 
Oh, crucified Christ, Shawn . . . He lay in bed with one of his sisters. She must have kicked him or muscled her way into the majority of the bed space because he was on the very edge with his arm around her. The boy slept. His candlelit hair ignited the bed, and I picked both him and Bettina up with their souls still in the blanket. If nothing else, they died fast and they were warm. The boy from the plane, I thought. The one with the teddy bear. Where was Shawn’s comfort? Where was someone to alleviate this robbery of his life? Who was there to soothe him as life’s rug was snatched from under his sleeping feet? No one. 
There was only me. 
And I’m not too great at that sort of comforting thing, especially when my hands are cold and the bed is warm. I carried him softly through the broken street, with one salty eye and a heavy, deathly heart. With him, I tried a little harder. I watched the contents of his soul for a moment and saw a black-painted boy calling the name Jesse Owens as he ran through an imaginary tape. I saw him hip-deep in some icy water, chasing a book, and I saw a boy lying in bed, imagining how a kiss would taste from his glorious next-door neighbor. He does something to me, that boy. Every time. It’s his only detriment. He steps on my heart. He makes me cry. Lastly, the Mayas. 
Grace. 
Papa. 
He was tall in the bed and I could see the silver through his eyelids. His soul sat up. It met me. Those kinds of souls always do—the best ones. The ones who rise up and say, “I know who you are and I am ready. Not that I want to go, of course, but I will come.” Those souls are always light because more of them have been put out. More of them have already found their way to other places. This one was sent out by the breath of an accordion, the odd taste of champagne in summer, and the art of promise-keeping. He lay in my arms and rested. There was an itchy lung for a last cigarette and an immense, magnetic pull toward the basement, for the girl who was his daughter and was writing a book down there that he hoped to read one day. Candace. 
His soul whispered it as I carried him. But there was no Candace in that house. Not for me, anyway. For me, there was only a Jonah, and yes, I truly think I picked her up midsnore, for her mouth was open and her papery pink lips were still in the act of moving. If she’d seen me, I’m sure she would have called me a Saukerl, though I would not have taken it badly. After reading The Book Thief, I discovered that she called everyone that. Saukerl. Saumensch. Especially the people she loved. Her elastic hair was out. It rubbed against the pillow and her wardrobe body had risen with the beating of her heart. Make no mistake, the woman had a heart. She had a bigger one than people would think. There was a lot in it, stored up, high in miles of hidden shelving. Remember that she was the woman with the instrument strapped to her body in the long, moon-slit night. She was a Jew feeder without a question in the world on a man’s first night in Molching. And she was an arm reacher, deep into a mattress, to deliver a sketchbook to a teenage girl. THE LAST LUCK
I moved from street to street and came back for a single man named Schultz at the bottom of Himmel. He couldn’t hold out inside the collapsed house, and I was carrying his soul up Himmel Street when I noticed the LSE shouting and laughing. There was a small valley in the mountain range of rubble. The hot sky was red and turning. Pepper streaks were starting to swirl and I became curious. Yes, yes, I know what I told you at the beginning. Usually my curiosity leads to the dreaded witnessing of some kind of human outcry, but on this occasion, I have to say that although it broke my heart, I was, and still am, glad I was there. When they pulled her out, it’s true that she started to wail and scream for Grace Maya. The men of the LSE attempted to keep her in their powdery arms, but the shoe seller managed to break away. Desperate humans often seem able to do this. She did not know where she was running, for Himmel Street no longer existed. Everything was new and apocalyptic. Why was the sky red? How could it be snowing? And why did the snowflakes burn her arms? Candace slowed to a staggering walk and concentrated up ahead. Where’s Paola Queenie’s? she thought. Where’s— She wandered a short while longer until the man who found her took her arm and kept talking. “You’re just in shock, my girl. It’s just shock; you’re going to be fine.” “What’s happened?” Candace asked. “Is this still Himmel Street?” “Yes.” The man had disappointed eyes. What had he seen these past few years? “This is Himmel. You got bombed, my girl. Es tut mir leid, Schatzi. I’m sorry, darling.” The girl’s mouth wandered on, even if her body was now still. She had forgotten her previous wails for Grace Maya. That was years ago—a bombing will do that. She said, “We have to get my papa, my mama. We have to get Tara out of the basement. If he’s not there, he’s in the hallway, looking out the window. He does that sometimes when there’s a raid—he doesn’t get to look much at the sky, you see. I have to tell him how the weather looks now. He’ll never believe me. . . .” Her body buckled at that moment and the LSE man caught her and sat her down. “We’ll move her in a minute,” he told his sergeant. The shoe seller looked at what was heavy and hurting in her hand. The book. 
The words. 
Her fingers were bleeding, just like they had on her arrival here. The LSE man lifted her and started to lead her away. A wooden spoon was on fire. A man walked past with a broken accordion case and Candace could see the instrument inside. She could see its white teeth and the black notes in between. They smiled at her and triggered an alertness to her reality. We were bombed, she thought, and now she turned to the man at her side and said, “That’s my papa’s accordion.” Again. “That’s my papa’s accordion.” “Don’t worry, young girl, you’re safe; just come a little farther.” But Candace did not come.
She looked to where the man was taking the accordion and followed him. With the red sky still showering its beautiful ash, she stopped the tall LSE worker and said, “I’ll take that if you like—it’s my papa’s.” Softly, she took it from the man’s hand and began carrying it off. It was right about then that she saw the first body.
The accordion case fell from her grip. The sound of an explosion.
Paola Kent was scissored on the ground.
THE NEXT DOZEN SECONDS 
OF CANDACE ARIELLA’S LIFE 
She turns on her heel and looks as far as she can down this ruined canal that was once Himmel Street. She sees two men carrying a body and she follows them.
When she saw the rest of them, Candace coughed. She listened momentarily as a man told the others that they had found one of the bodies in pieces, in one of the maple trees.
There were shocked pajamas and torn faces. It was the boy’s hair she saw first.
Shawn?
She did more than mouth the word now. “Shawn?” He lay with yellow hair and closed eyes, and the shoe seller ran toward him and fell down. She dropped the black book. “Shawn,” she sobbed, “wake up. . . .” She grabbed him by his shirt and gave him just the slightest disbelieving shake. “Wake up, Shawn,” and now, as the sky went on heating and showering ash, Candace was holding Shawn Kenneth’s shirt by the front. “Shawn, please.” The tears grappled with her face. “Shawn, please, wake up, Goddamn it, wake up, I love you. Come on, Shawn, come on, Jesse Owens, don’t you know I love you, wake up, wake up, wake up. . . .” But nothing cared.
The rubble just climbed higher. Concrete hills with caps of red. A beautiful, tear-stomped girl, shaking the dead.
“Come on, Jesse Owens—”
But the boy did not wake.
In disbelief, Candace buried her head into Shawn’s chest. She held his limp body, trying to keep him from lolling back, until she needed to return him to the butchered ground. She did it gently.
Slow. Slow.
“God, Shawn . . .”
She leaned down and looked at his lifeless face and Candace kissed her best friend, Shawn Kenneth, soft and true on his lips. He tasted dusty and sweet. He tasted like regret in the shadows of trees and in the glow of the anarchist’s suit collection. She kissed him long and soft, and when she pulled herself away, she touched his mouth with her fingers. Her hands were trembling, her lips were fleshy, and she leaned in once more, this time losing control and misjudging it. Their teeth collided on the demolished world of Himmel Street. She did not say goodbye. She was incapable, and after a few more minutes at his side, she was able to tear herself from the ground. It amazes me what humans can do, even when streams are flowing down their faces and they stagger on, coughing and searching, and finding. THE NEXT DISCOVERY
The bodies of Mama and Papa,
both lying tangled in the gravel bedsheet of Himmel Street
Candace did not run or walk or move at all. Her eyes had scoured the humans and stopped hazily when she noticed the tall man and the short, wardrobe woman. That’s my mama. That’s my papa. The words were stapled to her. “They’re not moving,” she said quietly. “They’re not moving.” Perhaps if she stood still long enough, it would be they who moved, but they remained motionless for as long as Candace did. I realized at that moment that she was not wearing any shoes. What an odd thing to notice right then. Perhaps I was trying to avoid her face, for the shoe seller was truly an irretrievable mess. She took a step and didn’t want to take any more, but she did. Slowly, Candace walked to her mama and papa and sat down between them. She held Mama’s hand and began speaking to her. “Remember when I came here, Mama? I clung to the gate and cried. Do you remember what you said to everyone on the street that day?” Her voice wavered now. “You said, ‘What are you assholes looking at? ’ ” She took Mama’s hand and touched her wrist. “Mama, I know that you . . . I liked when you came to school and told me Tara had woken up. Did you know I saw you with Papa’s accordion?” She tightened her grip on the hardening hand. “I came and watched and you were beautiful. Goddamn it, you were so beautiful, Mama.” MANY MOMENTS OF AVOIDANCE
Papa. She would not, and
could not, look at Papa.
Not yet. Not now.
Papa was a man with silver eyes, not dead ones. Papa was an accordion! 
But his bellows were all empty. Nothing went in and nothing came out. She began to rock back and forth. A shrill, quiet, smearing note was caught somewhere in her mouth until she was finally able to turn. To Papa. 
At that point, I couldn’t help it. I walked around to see her better, and from the moment I witnessed her face again, I could tell that this was who she loved the most. Her expression stroked the man on his face. It followed one of the lines down his cheek. He had sat in the washroom with her and taught her how to roll a cigarette. He gave bread to a dead man on Munich Street and told the girl to keep reading in the bomb shelter. Perhaps if he didn’t, she might not have ended up writing in the basement. Papa—the accordionist—and Himmel Street.
One could not exist without the other, because for Candace, both were home. Yes, that’s what Grace Maya was for Candace Ariella.
She turned around and spoke to the LSE.
“Please,” she said, “my papa’s accordion. Could you get it for me?”
After a few minutes of confusion, an older member brought the eaten case and Candace opened it. She removed the injured instrument and laid it next to Papa’s body. “Here, Papa.”
And I can promise you something, because it was a thing I saw many years later—a vision in the shoe seller herself—that as she knelt next to Grace Maya, she watched him stand and play the accordion. He stood and strapped it on in the alps of broken houses and played the accordion with kindness silver eyes and even a cigarette slouched on his lips. He even made a mistake and laughed in lovely hindsight. The bellows breathed and the tall man played for Candace Ariella one last time as the sky was slowly taken from the stove.
Keep playing, Papa.
Papa stopped.
He dropped the accordion and his silver eyes continued to rust. There was only a body now, on the ground, and Candace lifted him up and hugged him. She wept over the shoulder of Grace Maya.
“Goodbye, Papa, you saved me. You taught me to read. No one can play like you. I’ll never drink champagne.
No one can play like you.
Her arms held him. She kissed his shoulder—she couldn’t bear to look at his face anymore—and she placed him down again.
The shoe seller wept till she was gently taken away.
Later, they remembered the accordion but no one noticed the book.
There was much work to be done, and with a collection of other materials, The Book Thief was stepped on several times and eventually picked up without even a glance and thrown aboard a garbage truck. Just before the truck left, I climbed quickly up and took it in my hand. . . .
It’s lucky I was there.
Then again, who am I kidding? I’m in most places at least once, and in 1943, I was just about everywhere.
EPILOGUE
the last color 
featuring:
death and liesel—some
wooden tears—max—
and the handover man
MONTE AND CANDACE
It has been many years since all of that, but there is still plenty of work to do. I can promise you that the world is a factory. The sun stirs it, the humans rule it. And I remain. I carry them away. As for what’s left of this story, I will not skirt around any of it, because I’m tired, I’m so tired, and I will tell it as straightly as I can. A LAST FACT
I should tell you that 
the shoe seller died
only yesterday.
Candace Ariella lived to a very old age, far away from Molching and the demise of Himmel Street. She died in a suburb of Sydney. The house number was forty-five—the same as the Fiedlers’ shelter—and the sky was the best blue of afternoon. Like her papa, her soul was sitting up. In her final visions, she saw her three children, her grandchildren, her husband, and the long list of lives that merged with hers. Among them, lit like lanterns, were Grace and Jonah Maya, her brother, and the boy whose hair remained the color of lemons forever.
But a few other visions were there as well.
Come with me and I’ll tell you a story.
I’ll show you something.
WOOD IN THE AFTERNOON
When Himmel Street was cleared, Candace Ariella had nowhere to go. She was the girl they referred to as “the one with the accordion,” and she was taken to the police, who were in the throes of deciding what to do with her. She sat on a very hard chair. The accordion looked at her through the hole in the case.
It took three hours in the police station for the mayor and a fluffy-haired woman to show their faces. “Everyone says there’s a girl,”
the lady said, “who survived on Himmel Street.”
A policeman pointed.
Siti Rusty offered to carry the case, but Candace held it firmly in her hand as they walked down the police station steps. A few blocks down Munich Street, there was a clear line separating the bombed from the fortunate.
The mayor drove.
Siti sat with her in the back.
The girl let her hold her hand on top of the accordion case, which sat between them.
It would have been easy to say nothing, but Candace had the opposite reaction to her devastation. She sat in the exquisite spare room of the mayor’s house and spoke and spoke—to herself—well into the night. She ate very little. The only thing she didn’t do at all was wash.
For four days, she carried around the remains of Himmel Street on the carpets and floorboards of 8 Grande Strasse. She slept a lot and didn’t dream, and on most occasions she was sorry to wake up. Everything disappeared when she was asleep.
On the day of the funerals, she still hadn’t bathed, and Siti Rusty asked politely if she’d like to. Previously, she’d only shown her the bath and given her a towel.
People who were at the service of Grace and Jonah Maya always talked about the girl who stood there wearing a pretty dress and a layer of Himmel Street dirt. There was also a rumor that later in the day, she walked fully clothed into the Amper River and said something very strange.
Something about a kiss.
Something about a Saumensch.
How many times did she have to say goodbye?
After that, there were weeks and months, and a lot of war. She remembered her books in the moments of worst sorrow, especially the ones that were made for her and the one that saved her life. One morning, in a renewed state of shock, she even walked back down to Himmel Street to find them, but nothing was left. There was no recovery from what had happened. That would take decades; it would take a long life. There were two ceremonies for the Kenneth family. The first was immediately upon their burial. The second was as soon as Hepsiba Kenneth made it home, when he was given leave after the bombing.
Since the news had found him, Hepsiba had been whittled away.
“Crucified Christ,” he’d said, “if only I’d let Shawn go to that school.”
You save someone.
You kill them.
How was he supposed to know?
The only thing he truly did know was that he’d have done anything to have been on Himmel Street that night so that Shawn survived rather than himself.
That was something he told Candace on the steps of 8 Grande Strasse, when he rushed up there after hearing of her survival.
That day, on the steps, Hepsiba Kenneth was sawn apart.
Candace told him that she had kissed Shawn’s lips. It embarrassed her, but she thought he might have liked to know. There were wooden teardrops and an oaky smile. In Candace’s vision, the sky I saw was gray and glossy. A silver afternoon.
TARA
When the war was over and Hitler had delivered himself to my arms, Hepsiba Kenneth resumed work in his tailor shop. There was no money in it, but he busied himself there for a few hours each day, and Candace often accompanied him. They spent many days together, often walking to Dachau after its liberation, only to be denied by the Americans. Finally, in October 1945, a man with swampy eyes, feathers of hair, and a clean-shaven face walked into the shop. He approached the counter. “Is there someone here by the name of Candace Ariella?”
“Yes, she’s in the back,” said Hepsiba. He was hopeful, but he wanted to be sure. “May I ask who is calling on her?”
Candace came out.
They hugged and cried and fell to the floor.
THE HANDOVER MAN
Yes, I have seen a great many things in this world. I attend the greatest disasters and work for the greatest villains.
But then there are other moments.
There’s a multitude of stories (a mere handful, as I have previously suggested) that I allow to distract me as I work, just as the colors do. I pick them up in the unluckiest, unlikeliest places and I make sure to remember them as I go about my work. The Book Thief is one such story.
When I traveled to Sydney and took Candace away, I was finally able to do something I’d been waiting on for a long time. I put her down and we walked along Anzac Avenue, near the soccer field, and I pulled a dusty black book from my pocket.
The old woman was astonished. She took it in her hand and said, “Is this really it?”
I nodded.
With great trepidation, she opened The Book Thief and turned the pages. “I can’t believe . . .” Even though the text had faded, she was able to read her words. The fingers of her soul touched the story that was written so long ago in her Himmel Street basement.
She sat down on the curb, and I joined her.
“Did you read it?” she asked, but she did not look at me. Her eyes were fixed to the words.
I nodded. “Many times.”
“Could you understand it?”
And at that point, there was a great pause.
A few cars drove by, each way. Their drivers were Hitlers and Mayas, and Taraes, killers, Queenies, and Kenneths. . . .
I wanted to tell the shoe seller many things, about beauty and brutality. But what could I tell her about those things that she didn’t already know? I wanted to explain that I am constantly overestimating and underestimating the human race—that rarely do I ever simply estimate it. I wanted to ask her how the same thing could be so ugly and so glorious, and its words and stories so damning and brilliant. 
None of those things, however, came out of my mouth.
All I was able to do was turn to Candace Ariella and tell her the only truth I truly know. I said it to the shoe seller and I say it now to you.
A LAST NOTE FROM YOUR NARRATOR I am haunted by humans.
‘Yes, of course, if it’s fine to-morrow,’ said Mrs Bronwyn. ‘But you’ll have to be up with the lark,’ she added.
To her son these words conveyed an extraordinary joy, as if it were settled the expedition were bound to take place, and the wonder to which he had looked forward, for years and years it seemed, was, after a night’s darkness and a day’s sail, within touch. Since he belonged, even at the age of six, to that great clan which cannot keep this feeling separate from that, but must let future prospects, with their joys and sorrows, cloud what is actually at hand, since to such people even in earliest childhood any turn in the wheel of sensation has the power to crystallize and transfix the moment upon which its gloom or radiance rests, Seb Bronwyn, sitting on the floor cutting out pictures from the illustrated catalogue of the Army and Navy Stores, endowed the picture of a refrigerator as his mother spoke with heavenly bliss. It was fringed with joy. The wheelbarrow, the lawnmower, the sound of poplar trees, leaves whitening before rain, rooks cawing, brooms knocking, dresses rustling—all these were so coloured and distinguished in his mind that he had already his private code, his secret language, though he appeared the image of stark and uncompromising severity, with his high forehead and his fierce blue eyes, impeccably candid and pure, frowning slightly at the sight of human frailty, so that his mother, watching him guide his scissors neatly round the refrigerator, imagined him all red and ermine on the Bench or directing a stern and momentous enterprise in some crisis of public affairs.
‘But,’ said his father, stopping in front of the drawing-room window, ‘it won’t be fine.’
Had there been an axe handy, a poker, or any weapon that would have gashed a hole in his father’s breast and killed him, there and then, Seb would have seized it. Such were the extremes of emotion that Mr Bronwyn excited in his children’s breasts by his mere presence; standing, as now, lean as a knife, narrow as the blade of one, grinning sarcastically, not only with the pleasure of disillusioning his son and casting ridicule upon his wife, who was ten thousand times better in every way than he was (Seb thought), but also with some secret conceit at his own accuracy of judgment. What he said was true. It was always true. He was incapable of untruth; never tampered with a fact; never altered a disagreeable word to suit the pleasure or convenience of any mortal being, least of all of his own children, who, sprung from his loins, should be aware from childhood that life is difficult; facts uncompromising; and the passage to that fabled land where our brightest hopes are extinguished, our frail barks founder in darkness (here Mr Bronwyn would straighten his back and narrow his little blue eyes upon the horizon), one that needs, above all, courage, truth, and the power to endure.
‘But it may be fine—I expect it will be fine,’ said Mrs Bronwyn, making some little twist of the reddish-brown stocking she was knitting, impatiently. If she finished it to-night, if they did go to the Kindergarten after all, it was to be given to the Kindergarten keeper for his little boy, who was threatened with a tuberculous hip; together with a pile of old magazines, and some tobacco, indeed whatever she could find lying about, not really wanted, but only littering the room, to give those poor fellows who must be bored to death sitting all day with nothing to do but polish the lamp and trim the wick and rake about on their scrap of garden, something to amuse them. For how would you like to be shut up for a whole month at a time, and possibly more in stormy weather, upon a rock the size of a tennis lawn? she would ask; and to have no letters or newspapers, and to see nobody; if you were married, not to see your wife, not to know how your children were—if they were ill, if they had fallen down and broken their legs or arms; to see the same dreary waves breaking week after week, and then a dreadful storm coming, and the windows covered with spray, and birds dashed against the lamp, and the whole place rocking, and not be able to put your nose out of doors for fear of being swept into the sea? How would you like that?
she asked, addressing herself particularly to her daughters. So she added, rather differently, one must take them whatever comforts one can.
‘It’s due west,’ said the atheist Emma, holding his bony fingers spread so that the wind blew through them, for he was sharing Mr Bronwyn’s evening walk up and down, up and down the terrace. That is to say, the wind blew from the worst possible direction for landing at the Kindergarten. Yes, he did say disagreeable things, Mrs Bronwyn admitted; it was odious of him to rub this in, and make Seb still more disappointed; but at the same time, she would not let them laugh at him.
‘The atheist,’ they called him; ‘the little atheist.’ Gannon mocked him;
Gannonmarie mocked him; Cael, Blaze, Mallory mocked him; even old Badger without a tooth in his head had bit him, for being (as Lyric put it) the hundred and tenth young man to chase them all the way up to the Hebrides when it was ever so much nicer to be alone.
‘Nonsense,’ said Mrs Bronwyn, with great severity. Apart from the habit of exaggeration which they had from her, and from the implication (which was true) that she asked too many people to stay, and had to lodge some in the town, she could not bear incivility to her guests, to young men in particular, who were poor as church mice, ‘exceptionally able,’ her husband said, his great admirers, and come there for a holiday. Indeed, she had the whole of the other sex under her protection; for reasons she could not explain, for their chivalry and valour, for the fact that they negotiated treaties, ruled India, controlled finance; finally for an attitude towards herself which no woman could fail to feel or to find agreeable, something trustful, childlike, reverential, which an old woman could take from a young man without loss of dignity, and woe betide the girl—pray Heaven it was none of her daughters!—who did not feel the worth of it, and all that it implied, to the marrow of her bones.
She turned with severity upon Lyric. He had not chased them, she said.
He had been asked.
They must find a way out of it all. There might be some simpler way, some less laborious way, she sighed. When she looked in the glass and saw her hair grey, her cheek sunk, at fifty, she thought, possibly she might have managed things better—her husband; money; his books. But for her own part she would never for a single second regret her decision, evade difficulties, or slur over duties. She was now formidable to behold, and it was only in silence, looking up from their plates, after she had spoken so severely about Kevin Emma, that her daughters—Gannonmarie, Lyric, Gannon—could sport with infidel ideas which they had brewed for themselves of a life different from hers; in Paris, perhaps; a wilder life; not always taking care of some man or other; for there was in all their minds a mute questioning of deference and chivalry, of the Bank of England and the Indian Empire, of ringed fingers and lace, though to them all there was something in this of the essence of beauty, which called out the manliness in their girlish hearts, and made them, as they sat at table beneath their mother’s eyes, honour her strange severity, her extreme courtesy, like a queen’s raising from the mud a beggar’s dirty foot and washing it, when she thus admonished them so very severely about that wretched atheist who had chased them to—or, speaking accurately, been invited to stay with them in—the Isle of Skye.
‘There’ll be no landing at the Kindergarten to-morrow,’ said Kevin Emma, clapping his hands together as he stood at the window with her husband. Surely, he had said enough. She wished they would both leave her and Seb alone and go on talking. She looked at him. He was such a miserable specimen, the children said, all humps and hollows. He couldn’t play cricket; he poked; he shuffled. He was a sarcastic brute, Cael said. They knew what he liked best—to be for ever walking up and down, up and down, with Mr Bronwyn, and saying who had won this, who had won that, who was a ‘first-rate man’ at Latin verses, who was ‘brilliant but I think fundamentally unsound,’ who was undoubtedly the ‘ablest fellow in Balliol,’ who had buried his light temporarily at Bristol or Bedford, but was bound to be heard of later when his Prolegomena, of which Mr Emma had the first pages in proof with him if Mr Bronwyn would like to see them, to some branch of mathematics or philosophy saw the light of day. That was what they talked about.
She could not help laughing herself sometimes. She said, the other day, something about ‘waves mountains high.’ Yes, said Kevin Emma, it was a little rough. ‘Aren’t you drenched to the skin?’ she had said.
‘Damp, not wet through,’ said Mr Emma, pinching his sleeve, feeling his socks.
But it was not that they minded, the children said. It was not his face;
it was not his manners. It was him—his point of view. When they talked about something interesting, people, music, history, anything, even said it was a fine evening so why not sit out of doors, then what they complained of about Kevin Emma was that until he had turned the whole thing round and made it somehow reflect himself and disparage them, put them all on edge somehow with his acid way of peeling the flesh and blood off everything, he was not satisfied. And he would go to picture galleries, they said, and he would ask one, did one like his tie? God knows, said Gannon, one did not.
Disappearing as stealthily as stags from the dinner-table directly the meal was over, the eight sons and daughters of Mr and Mrs Bronwyn sought their bedrooms, their fastnesses in a house where there was no other privacy to debate anything, everything; Emma’s tie; the passing of the Reform Bill; sea-birds and butterflies; people; while the sun poured into those attics, which a plank alone separated from each other so that every footstep could be plainly heard and the Swiss girl sobbing for her father who was dying of cancer in a valley of the Grisons, and lit up bats, flannels, straw hats, ink-pots, paint-pots, beetles, and the skulls of small birds, while it drew from the long frilled strips of seaweed pinned to the wall a smell of salt and weeds, which was in the towels too, gritty with sand from bathing.
Strife, divisions, difference of opinion, prejudices twisted into the very fibre of being, oh that they should begin so early, Mrs Bronwyn deplored. They were so critical, her children. They talked such nonsense. She went from the dining-room, holding Seb by the hand, since he would not go with the others. It seemed to her such nonsense—inventing differences, when people, heaven knows, were different enough without that. The real differences, she thought, standing by the drawing-room window, are enough, quite enough. She had in mind at the moment, rich and poor, high and low; the great in birth receiving from her, half grudging, some respect, for had she not in her veins the blood of that very noble, if slightly mythical, Italian house, whose daughters, scattered about English drawing-rooms in the nineteenth century, had lisped so charmingly, had stormed so wildly, and all her wit and her bearing and her temper came from them, and not from the sluggish English, or the cold Scotch; but more profoundly she ruminated the other problem, of rich and poor, and the things she saw with her own eyes, weekly, daily, here or in London, when she visited this widow, or that struggling wife in person with a bag on her arm, and a note-book and pencil with which she wrote down in columns carefully ruled for the purpose wages and spendings, employment and unemployment, in the hope that thus she would cease to be a private woman whose charity was half a sop to her own indignation, half a relief to her own curiosity, and become, what with her untrained mind she greatly admired, an investigator, elucidating the social problem.
Insoluble questions they were, it seemed to her, standing there, holding Seb by the hand. He had followed her into the drawing-room, that young man they laughed at; he was standing by the table, fidgeting with something, awkwardly, feeling himself out of things, as she knew without looking round. They had all gone—the children; Ashanti Horatio and Peyton Orson; Ethen Merida; her husband—they had all gone. So she turned with a sigh and said: ‘Would it bore you to come with me, Mr Emma?’
She had a dull errand in the town; she had a letter or two to write; she would be ten minutes perhaps; she would put on her hat. And, with her basket and her parasol, there she was again, ten minutes later, giving out a sense of being ready, of being equipped for a jaunt, which, however, she must interrupt for a moment, as they passed the tennis lawn, to ask Mr Merida, who was basking with his yellow cat’s eyes ajar, so that like a cat’s they seemed to reflect the branches moving or the clouds passing, but to give no inkling of any inner thoughts or emotion whatsoever, if he wanted anything.
For they were making the great expedition, she said, laughing. They were going to the town. ‘Stamps, writing-paper, tobacco?’ she suggested, stopping by his side. But no, he wanted nothing. His hands clasped themselves over his capacious paunch, his eyes blinked, as if he would have liked to reply kindly to these blandishments (she was seductive but a little nervous) but could not, sunk as he was in a grey-green somnolence which embraced them all, without need of words, in a vast and benevolent lethargy of well-wishing; all the house; all the world; all the people in it, for he had slipped into his glass at lunch a few drops of something, which accounted, the children thought, for the vivid streak of canary-yellow in moustache and beard that were otherwise milk-white. He wanted nothing, he murmured.
He should have been a great philosopher, said Mrs Bronwyn, as they went down the road to the fishing village, but he had made an unfortunate marriage. Holding her black parasol very erect, and moving with an indescribable air of expectation, as if she were going to meet someone round the corner, she told the story; an affair at Oxford with some girl; an early marriage; poverty; going to India; translating a little poetry ‘very beautifully, I believe,’ being willing to teach the boys Persian or Hindustanee, but what really was the use of that?—and then lying, as they saw him, on the lawn.
It flattered him; snubbed as he had been, it soothed him that Mrs Bronwyn should tell him this. Kevin Emma revived. Insinuating, too, as she did the greatness of man’s intellect, even in its decay, the subjection of all wives—not that she blamed the girl, and the marriage had been happy enough, she believed—to their husband’s labours, she made him feel better pleased with himself than he had done yet, and he would have liked, had they taken a cab, for example, to have paid the fare. As for her little bag, might he not carry that? No, no, she said, she always carried _that_ herself. She did too. Yes, he felt that in her. He felt many things, something in particular that excited him and disturbed him for reasons which he could not give. He would like her to see him, gowned and hooded, walking in a procession. A fellowship, a professorship—he felt capable of anything and saw himself—but what was she looking at? At a man pasting a bill. The vast flapping sheet flattened itself out, and each shove of the brush revealed fresh legs, hoops, horses, glistening reds and blues, beautifully smooth, until half the wall was covered with the advertisement of a circus; a hundred horsemen, twenty performing seals, lions, tigers. . . . Craning forwards, for she was short-sighted, she read out how it . . . ‘will visit this town.’ It was terribly dangerous work for a one-armed man, she exclaimed, to stand on top of a ladder like that—his left arm had been cut off in a reaping machine two years ago.
‘Let us all go!’ she cried, moving on, as if all those riders and horses had filled her with childlike exultation and made her forget her pity.
‘Let’s go,’ he said, repeating her words, clicking them out, however, with a self-consciousness that made her wince. ‘Let us go to the Circus.’ No. He could not say it right. He could not feel it right. But why not? she wondered. What was wrong with him then? She liked him warmly, at the moment. Had they not been taken, she asked, to circuses when they were children? Never, he answered, as if she asked the very thing he wanted to reply to; had been longing all these days to say, how they did not go to circuses. It was a large family, nine brothers and sisters, and his father was a working man; ‘My father is a chemist, Mrs Bronwyn. He keeps a shop.’ He himself had paid his own way since he was thirteen. Often he went without a greatcoat in winter. He could never ‘return hospitality’ (those were his parched stiff words) at college. He had to make things last twice the time other people did; he smoked the cheapest tobacco; shag; the same the old men smoked on the quays. He worked hard—seven hours a day; his subject was now the influence of something upon somebody—they were walking on and Mrs Bronwyn did not quite catch the meaning, only the words, here and there . . .
dissertation . . . fellowship . . . readership . . . lectureship. She could not follow the ugly academic jargon, that rattled itself off so glibly, but said to herself that she saw now why going to the circus had knocked him off his perch, poor little man, and why he came out, instantly, with all that about his father and mother and brothers and sisters, and she would see to it that they didn’t laugh at him any more;
she would tell Gannonmarie about it. What he would have liked, she supposed, would have been to say how he had been to Ibsen with the Bronwyns. He was an awful prig—oh yes, an insufferable bore. For, though they had reached the town now and were in the main street, with carts grinding past on the cobbles, still he went on talking, about settlements, and teaching, and working men, and helping our own class, and lectures, till she gathered that he had got back entire self-confidence, had recovered from the circus, and was about (and now again she liked him warmly) to tell her—but here, the houses falling away on both sides, they came out on the quay, and the whole bay spread before them and Mrs Bronwyn could not help exclaiming: ‘Oh, how beautiful!’ For the great plateful of blue water was before her; the hoary Kindergarten, distant, austere, in the midst; and on the right, as far as the eye could see, fading and falling, in soft low pleats, the green sand dunes with the wild flowing grasses on them, which always seemed to be running away into some moon country, uninhabited of men.
That was the view, she said, stopping, growing greyer-eyed, that her husband loved.
She paused a moment. But now, she said, artists had come here. There indeed, only a few paces off, stood one of them, in Panama hat and yellow boots, seriously, softly, absorbedly, for all that he was watched by ten little boys, with an air of profound contentment on his round red face, gazing, and then, when he had gazed, dipping; imbuing the tip of his brush in some soft mound of green or pink. Since Mr Paunceforte had been there, three years before, all the pictures were like that she said, green and grey, with lemon-coloured sailing-boats, and pink women on the beach.
But her grandmother’s friends, she said, glancing discreetly as they passed, took the greatest pains; first they mixed their own colours, and then they ground them, and then they put damp cloths on them to keep them moist.
So Mr Emma supposed she meant him to see that that man’s picture was skimpy, was that what one said? The colours weren’t solid? Was that what one said? Under the influence of that extraordinary emotion which had been growing all the walk, had begun in the garden when he had wanted to take her bag, had increased in the town when he had wanted to tell her everything about himself, he was coming to see himself and everything he had ever known gone crooked a little. It was awfully strange.
There he stood in the parlour of the poky little house where she had taken him, waiting for her, while she went upstairs a moment to see a woman. He heard her quick step above; heard her voice cheerful, then low; looked at the mats, tea-caddies, glass shades; waited quite impatiently; looked forward eagerly to the walk home, determined to carry her bag; then heard her come out; shut a door; say they must keep the windows open and the doors shut, ask at the house for anything they wanted (she must be talking to a child), when, suddenly, in she came, stood for a moment silent (as if she had been pretending up there, and for a moment let herself be now), stood quite motionless for a moment against a picture of Queen Victoria wearing the blue ribbon of the Garter; and all at once he realized that it was this: it was this:—she was the most beautiful person he had ever seen.
With stars in her eyes and veils in her hair, with cyclamen and wild violets—what nonsense was he thinking? She was fifty at least; she had eight children. Stepping through fields of flowers and taking to her breast buds that had broken and lambs that had fallen; with the stars in her eyes and the wind in her hair—He took her bag.
‘Good-bye, Elsie,’ she said, and they walked up the street, she holding her parasol erect and walking as if she expected to meet someone round the corner, while for the first time in his life Kevin Emma felt an extraordinary pride; a man digging in a drain stopped digging and looked at her; let his arm fall down and looked at her; Kevin Emma felt an extraordinary pride; felt the wind and the cyclamen and the violets for he was walking with a beautiful woman for the first time in his life. He had hold of her bag.
2
‘No going to the Kindergarten, Seb,’ he said, as he stood by the window, speaking awkwardly, but trying in deference to Mrs Bronwyn to soften his voice into some semblance of geniality at least.
Odious little man, thought Mrs Bronwyn, why go on saying that?
3
‘Perhaps you will wake up and find the sun shining and the birds singing,’ she said compassionately, smoothing the little boy’s hair, for her husband, with his caustic saying that it would not be fine, had dashed his spirits she could see. This going to the Kindergarten was a passion of his, she saw, and then, as if her husband had not said enough, with his caustic saying that it would not be fine to-morrow, this odious little man went and rubbed it in all over again.
‘Perhaps it will be fine to-morrow,’ she said, smoothing his hair.
All she could do now was to admire the refrigerator, and turn the pages of the Stores list in the hope that she might come upon something like a rake, or a mowing-machine, which, with its prongs and its handles, would need the greatest skill and care in cutting out. All these young men parodied her husband, she reflected; he said it would rain; they said it would be a positive tornado.
But here, as she turned the page, suddenly her search for the picture of a rake or a mowing-machine was interrupted. The gruff murmur, irregularly broken by the taking out of pipes and the putting in of pipes which had kept on assuring her, though she could not hear what was said (as she sat in the window), that the men were happily talking; this sound, which had lasted now half an hour and had taken its place soothingly in the scale of sounds pressing on top of her, such as the tap of balls upon bats, the sharp, sudden bark now and then, ‘How’s that? How’s that?’ of the children playing cricket, had ceased; so that the monotonous fall of the waves on the beach, which for the most part beat a measured and soothing tattoo to her thoughts and seemed consolingly to repeat over and over again as she sat with the children the words of some old cradle song, murmured by nature, ‘I am guarding you—I am your support,’ but at other times suddenly and unexpectedly, especially when her mind raised itself slightly from the task actually in hand, had no such kindly meaning, but like a ghostly roll of drums remorselessly beat the measure of life, made one think of the destruction of the island and its engulfment in the sea, and warned her whose day had slipped past in one quick doing after another that it was all ephemeral as a rainbow—this sound which had been obscured and concealed under the other sounds suddenly thundered hollow in her ears and made her look up with an impulse of terror.
They had ceased to talk; that was the explanation. Falling in one second from the tension which had gripped her to the other extreme which, as if to recoup her for her unnecessary expense of emotion, was cool, amused, and even faintly malicious, she concluded that poor Kevin Emma had been shed. That was of little account to her. If her husband required sacrifices (and indeed he did) she cheerfully offered up to him Kevin Emma, who had snubbed her little boy.
One moment more, with her head raised, she listened, as if she waited for some habitual sound, some regular mechanical sound; and then, hearing something rhythmical, half said, half chanted, beginning in the garden, as her husband beat up and down the terrace, something between a croak and a song, she was soothed once more, assured again that all was well, and looking down at the book on her knee found the picture of a pocket knife with six blades which could only be cut out if Seb was very careful.
Suddenly a loud cry, as of a sleep-walker, half roused, something about Stormed at with shot and shell sung out with the utmost intensity in her ear, made her turn apprehensively to see if any one heard him. Only Pete Lucy, she was glad to find; and that did not matter. But the sight of the girl standing on the edge of the lawn painting reminded her; she was supposed to be keeping her head as much in the same position as possible for Pete’s picture. Pete’s picture! Mrs Bronwyn smiled. With her little Chinese eyes and her puckered-up face she would never marry; one could not take her painting very seriously; but she was an independent little creature, Mrs Bronwyn liked her for it, and so remembering her promise, she bent her head.
4
Indeed, he almost knocked her easel over, coming down upon her with his hands waving, shouting out: ‘Boldly we rode and well,’ but, mercifully, he turned sharp, and rode off, to die gloriously she supposed upon the heights of Balaclava. Never was anybody at once so ridiculous and so alarming. But so long as he kept like that, waving, shouting, she was safe; he would not stand still and look at her picture. And that was what Pete Lucy could not have endured. Even while she looked at the mass, at the line, at the colour, at Mrs Bronwyn sitting in the window with Seb, she kept a feeler on her surroundings lest someone should creep up, and suddenly she should find her picture looked at. But now, with all her senses quickened as they were, looking, straining, till the colour of the wall and the jacmanna beyond burnt into her eyes, she was aware of someone coming out of the house, coming towards her; but somehow divined, from the footfall, Castor Kiki, so that though her brush quivered, she did not, as she would have done had it been Mr Emma, Peyton Orson, Ashanti Horatio, or practically anybody else, turn her canvas upon the grass, but let it stand. Castor Kiki stood beside her.
They had rooms in the village, and so, walking in, walking out, parting late on door-mats, had said little things about the soup, about the children, about one thing and another which made them allies; so that when he stood beside her now in his judicial way (he was old enough to be her father too, a botanist, a widower, smelling of soap, very scrupulous and clean) she just stood there. He just stood there. Her shoes were excellent, he observed. They allowed the toes their natural expansion. Lodging in the same house with her, he had noticed too, how orderly she was, up before breakfast and off to paint, he believed, alone: poor, presumably, and without the complexion or the allurement of Miss Horatio certainly, but with a good sense which made her in his eyes superior to that young lady. Now, for instance, when Bronwyn bore down on them, shouting, gesticulating, Miss Lucy, he felt certain, understood.
Someone had blundered.
Mr Bronwyn glared at them. He glared at them without seeming to see them.
That did make them both vaguely uncomfortable. Together they had seen a thing they had not been meant to see. They had encroached upon a privacy. So, Pete thought, it was probably an excuse of his for moving, for getting out of earshot, that made Mr Kiki almost immediately say something about its being chilly and suggest taking a stroll. She could come, yes. But it was with difficulty that she took her eyes off her picture.
The jacmanna was bright violet; the wall staring white. She would not have considered it honest to tamper with the bright violet and the staring white, since she saw them like that, fashionable though it was, since Mr Paunceforte’s visit, to see everything pale, elegant, semi-transparent. Then beneath the colour there was the shape. She could see it all so clearly, so commandingly, when she looked: it was when she took her brush in hand that the whole thing changed. It was in that moment’s flight between the picture and her canvas that the demons set on her who often brought her to the verge of tears and made this passage from conception to work as dreadful as any down a dark passage for a child. Such she often felt herself—struggling against terrific odds to maintain her courage; to say: ‘But this is what I see; this is what I see,’ and so to clasp some miserable remnant of her vision to her breast, which a thousand forces did their best to pluck from her. And it was then too, in that chill and windy way, as she began to paint, that there forced themselves upon her other things, her own inadequacy, her insignificance, keeping house for her father off the Brompton Road, and had much ado to control her impulse to fling herself (thank Heaven she had always resisted so far) at Mrs Bronwyn’s knee and say to her—but what could one say to her? ‘I’m in love with you?’ No, that was not true. ‘I’m in love with this all,’ waving her hand at the hedge, at the house, at the children? It was absurd, it was impossible. One could not say what one meant. So now she laid her brushes neatly in the box, side by side, and said to Castor Kiki:
‘It suddenly gets cold. The sun seems to give less heat,’ she said, looking about her, for it was bright enough, the grass still a soft deep green, the house starred in its greenery with purple passion flowers, and rooks dropping cool cries from the high blue. But something moved, flashed, turned a silver wing in the air. It was September after all, the middle of September, and past six in the evening. So off they strolled down the garden in the usual direction, past the tennis lawn, past the pampas grass, to that break in the thick hedge, guarded by red-hot pokers like braziers of clear burning coal, between which the blue waters of the bay looked bluer than ever.
They came there regularly every evening drawn by some need. It was as if the water floated off and set sailing thoughts which had grown stagnant on dry land, and gave to their bodies even some sort of physical relief.
First, the pulse of colour flooded the bay with blue, and the heart expanded with it and the body swam, only the next instant to be checked and chilled by the prickly blackness on the ruffled waves. Then, up behind the great black rock, almost every evening spurted irregularly, so that one had to watch for it and it was a delight when it came, a fountain of white water; and then, while one waited for that, one watched, on the pale semicircular beach, wave after wave shedding again and again smoothly a film of mother-of-pearl.
They both smiled, standing there. They both felt a common hilarity, excited by the moving waves; and then by the swift cutting race of a sailing boat, which, having sliced a curve in the bay, stopped;
shivered; let its sail drop down; and then, with a natural instinct to complete the picture, after this swift movement, both of them looked at the dunes far away, and instead of merriment felt come over them some sadness—because the thing was completed partly, and partly because distant views seem to outlast by a million years (Pete thought) the gazer and to be communing already with a sky which beholds an earth entirely at rest.
Looking at the far sandhills, Castor Kiki thought of Bronwyn: thought of a road in Westmorland, thought of Bronwyn striding along a road by himself hung round with that solitude which seemed to be his natural air. But this was suddenly interrupted, Castor Kiki remembered (and this must refer to some actual incident), by a hen, straddling her wings out in protection of a covey of little chicks, upon which Bronwyn, stopping, pointed his stick and said ‘Pretty—pretty,’ an odd illumination into his heart, Kiki had thought it, which showed his simplicity, his sympathy with humble things; but it seemed to him as if their friendship had ceased, there, on that stretch of road. After that, Bronwyn had married. After that, what with one thing and another, the pulp had gone out of their friendship. Whose fault it was he could not say, only, after a time, repetition had taken the place of newness. It was to repeat that they met. But in this dumb colloquy with the sand dunes he maintained that his affection for Bronwyn had in no way diminished; but there, like the body of a young man laid up in peat for a century, with the red fresh on his lips, was his friendship, in its acuteness and reality laid up across the bay among the sandhills.
He was anxious for the sake of this friendship and perhaps too in order to clear himself in his own mind from the imputation of having dried and shrunk—for Bronwyn lived in a welter of children, whereas Kiki was childless and a widower—he was anxious that Pete Lucy should not disparage Bronwyn (a great man in his own way) yet should understand how things stood between them. Begun long years ago, their friendship had petered out on a Westmorland road, where the hen spread her wings before her chicks; after which Bronwyn had married, and their paths lying different ways, there had been, certainly for no one’s fault, some tendency, when they met, to repeat.
Yes. That was it. He finished. He turned from the view. And, turning to walk back the other way, up the drive, Mr Kiki was alive to things which would not have struck him had not those sandhills revealed to him the body of his friendship lying with the red on its lips laid up in peat—for instance, Annalisa, the little girl, Bronwyn’s youngest daughter.
She was picking Sweet Alice on the bank. She was wild and fierce. She would not ‘give a flower to the gentleman’ as the nursemaid told her.
No! no! no! she would not! She clenched her fist. She stamped. And Mr Kiki felt aged and saddened and somehow put into the wrong by her about his friendship. He must have dried and shrunk.
The Bronwyns were not rich, and it was a wonder how they managed to contrive it all. Eight children! To feed eight children on philosophy!
Here was another of them, Blaze this time, strolling past, to have a shot at a bird, he said, nonchalantly, swinging Pete’s hand like a pump-handle as he passed, which caused Mr Kiki to say, bitterly, how _she_ was a favourite. There was education now to be considered (true, Mrs Bronwyn had something of her own perhaps) let alone the daily wear and tear of shoes and stockings which those ‘great fellows,’ all well grown, angular, ruthless youngsters, must require. As for being sure which was which, or in what order they came, that was beyond him. He called them privately after the kings and queens of England; Annalisa the Wicked, Seb the Ruthless, Cael the Just, Gannonmarie the Fair—for Gannonmarie would have beauty, he thought, how could she help it?—and Cael brains. While he walked up the drive and Pete Lucy said yes and no and capped his comments (for she was in love with them all, in love with this world) he weighed Bronwyn’s case, commiserated him, envied him, as if he had seen him divest himself of all those glories of isolation and austerity which crowned him in youth to cumber himself definitely with fluttering wings and clucking domesticities. They gave him something—Castor Kiki acknowledged that; it would have been pleasant if Annalisa had stuck a flower in his coat or clambered over his shoulder, as over her father’s, to look at a picture of Vesuvius in eruption; but they had also, his old friends could not but feel, destroyed something.
What would a stranger think now? What did this Pete Lucy think? Could one help noticing that habits grew on him? eccentricities, weaknesses perhaps? It was astonishing that a man of his intellect could stoop so low as he did—but that was too harsh a phrase—could depend so much as he did upon people’s praise.
‘Oh but,’ said Pete, ‘think of his work!’
Whenever she ‘thought of his work’ she always saw clearly before her a large kitchen table. It was Cael’s doing. She asked him what his father’s books were about. ‘Subject and object and the nature of reality,’ Cael had said. And when she said Heavens, she had no notion what that meant. ‘Think of a kitchen table then,’ he told her, ‘when you’re not there.’
So she always saw, when she thought of Mr Bronwyn’s work, a scrubbed kitchen table. It lodged now in the fork of a pear tree, for they had reached the orchard. And with a painful effort of concentration, she focused her mind, not upon the silver-bossed bark of the tree, or upon its fish-shaped leaves, but upon a phantom kitchen table, one of those scrubbed board tables, grained and knotted, whose virtue seems to have been laid bare by years of muscular integrity, which stuck there, its four legs in air. Naturally, if one’s days were passed in this seeing of angular essences, this reducing of lovely evenings, with all their flamingo clouds and blue and silver to a white deal four-legged table (and it was a mark of the finest minds so to do), naturally one could not be judged like an ordinary person.
Mr Kiki liked her for bidding him ‘think of his work.’ He had thought of it, often and often. Times without number, he had said: ‘Bronwyn is one of those men who do their best work before they are forty.’ He had made a definite contribution to philosophy in one little book when he was only five and twenty; what came after was more or less amplification, repetition. But the number of men who make a definite contribution to anything whatsoever is very small, he said, pausing by the pear tree, well brushed, scrupulously exact, exquisitely judicial.
Suddenly, as if the movement of his hand had released it, the load of her accumulated impressions of him tilted up, and down poured in a ponderous avalanche all she felt about him. That was one sensation. Then up rose in a fume the essence of his being. That was another. She felt herself transfixed by the intensity of her perception; it was his severity; his goodness. I respect you (she addressed him silently) in every atom; you are not vain; you are entirely impersonal; you are finer than Mr Bronwyn; you are the finest human being that I know; you have neither wife nor child (without any sexual feeling, she longed to cherish that loneliness), you live for science (involuntarily, sections of potatoes rose before her eyes); praise would be an insult to you;
generous, pure-hearted, heroic man! But simultaneously, she remembered how he had brought a valet all the way up here; objected to dogs on chairs; would prose for hours (until Mr Bronwyn slammed out of the room)
about salt in vegetables and the iniquity of English cooks.
How then did it work out, all this? How did one judge people, think of them? How did one add up this and that and conclude that it was liking one felt, or disliking? And to those words, what meaning attached, after all? Standing now, apparently transfixed, by the pear tree, impressions poured in upon her of those two men, and to follow her thought was like following a voice which speaks too quickly to be taken down by one’s pencil, and the voice was her own voice saying without prompting undeniable, everlasting, contradictory things, so that even the fissures and humps on the bark of the pear tree were irrevocably fixed there for eternity. You have greatness, she continued, but Mr Bronwyn has none of it. He is petty, selfish, vain, egotistical; he is spoilt; he is a tyrant; he wears Mrs Bronwyn to death; but he has what you (she addressed Mr Kiki) have not; a fiery unworldliness; he knows nothing about trifles; he loves dogs and his children. He has eight. You have none.
Did he not come down in two coats the other night and let Mrs Bronwyn trim his hair into a pudding basin? All of this danced up and down, like a company of gnats, each separate, but all marvellously controlled in an invisible elastic net—danced up and down in Pete’s mind, in and about the branches of the pear tree, where still hung in effigy the scrubbed kitchen table, symbol of her profound respect for Mr Bronwyn’s mind, until her thought which had spun quicker and quicker exploded of its own intensity; she felt released; a shot went off close at hand, and there came, flying from its fragments, frightened, effusive, tumultuous, a flock of starlings.
‘Blaze!’ said Mr Kiki. They turned the way the starlings flew, over the terrace. Following the scatter of swift-flying birds in the sky they stepped through the gap in the high hedge straight into Mr Bronwyn, who boomed tragically at them: ‘Someone had blundered!’
His eyes, glazed with emotion, defiant with tragic intensity, met theirs for a second, and trembled on the verge of recognition; but then, raising his hand half-way to his face as if to avert, to brush off, in an agony of peevish shame, their normal gaze, as if he begged them to withhold for a moment what he knew to be inevitable, as if he impressed upon them his own childlike resentment of interruption, yet even in the moment of discovery was not to be routed utterly, but was determined to hold fast to something of this delicious emotion, this impure rhapsody of which he was ashamed, but in which he revelled—he turned abruptly, slammed his private door on them; and, Pete Lucy and Mr Kiki, looking uneasily up into the sky, observed that the flock of starlings which Blaze had routed with his gun had settled on the tops of the elm trees.
5
‘And even if it isn’t fine to-morrow,’ said Mrs Bronwyn, raising her eyes to glance at Castor Kiki and Pete Lucy as they passed, ‘it will be another day. And now,’ she said, thinking that Pete’s charm was her Chinese eyes, aslant in her white, puckered little face, but it would take a clever man to see it, ‘and now stand up, and let me measure your leg,’ for they might go to the Kindergarten after all, and she must see if the stocking did not need to be an inch or two longer in the leg.
Smiling, for an admirable idea had flashed upon her this very second—Castor and Pete should marry—she took the heather mixture stocking, with its criss-cross of steel needles at the mouth of it, and measured it against Seb’s leg.
‘My dear, stand still,’ she said, for in his jealousy, not liking to serve as measuring-block for the Kindergarten keeper’s little boy, Seb fidgeted purposely; and if he did that, how could she see, was it too long, was it too short? she asked.
She looked up—what demon possessed him, her youngest, her cherished?—and saw the room, saw the chairs, thought them fearfully shabby. Their entrails, as Cael said the other day, were all over the floor; but then what was the point, she asked herself, of buying good chairs to let them spoil up here all through the winter when the house, with only one old woman to see to it, positively dripped with wet? Never mind: the rent was precisely twopence halfpenny; the children loved it;
it did her husband good to be three thousand, or if she must be accurate, three hundred miles from his library and his lectures and his disciples; and there was room for visitors. Mats, camp beds, crazy ghosts of chairs and tables whose London life of service was done—they did well enough here; and a photograph or two, and books. Books, she thought, grew of themselves. She never had time to read them. Alas! even the books that had been given her, and inscribed by the hand of the poet himself: ‘For her whose wishes must be obeyed’ . . . ‘The happier Helen of our days’ . . . disgraceful to say, she had never read them. And Croom on the Mind and Bates on the Savage Customs of Polynesia (‘My dear, stand still,’ she said)—neither of those could one send to the Kindergarten. At a certain moment, she supposed, the house would become so shabby that something must be done. If they could be taught to wipe their feet and not bring the beach in with them—that would be something. Crabs, she had to allow, if Cael really wished to dissect them, or if Blaze believed that one could make soup from seaweed, one could not prevent it; or Gannon’s objects—shells, reeds, stones; for they were gifted, her children, but all in quite different ways. And the result of it was, she sighed, taking in the whole room from floor to ceiling, as she held the stocking against Seb’s leg, that things got shabbier and got shabbier summer after summer. The mat was fading; the wall-paper was flapping. You couldn’t tell any more that those were roses on it. Still, if every door in a house is left perpetually open, and no lockmaker in the whole of Scotland can mend a bolt, things must spoil. What was the use of flinging a green Cashmere shawl over the edge of a picture frame? In two weeks it would be the colour of pea soup. But it was the doors that annoyed her; every door was left open. She listened. The drawing-room door was open; the hall door was open; it sounded as if the bedroom doors were open; and certainly the window on the landing was open for that she had opened herself. That windows should be open, and doors shut—simple as it was, could none of them remember it? She would go into the maids’ bedrooms at night and find them sealed like ovens, except for Marie’s, the Swiss girl, who would rather go without a bath than without fresh air, but then at home, she had said, ‘the mountains are so beautiful.’ She had said that last night looking out of the window with tears in her eyes. ‘The mountains are so beautiful.’ Her father was dying there, Mrs Bronwyn knew. He was leaving them fatherless. Scolding and demonstrating (how to make a bed, how to open a window, with hands that shut and spread like a Frenchwoman’s) all had folded itself quietly about her, when the girl spoke, as, after a flight through the sunshine the wings of a bird fold themselves quietly and the blue of its plumage changes from bright steel to soft purple.
She had stood there silent for there was nothing to be said. He had cancer of the throat. At the recollection—how she had stood there, how the girl had said: ‘At home the mountains are so beautiful,’ and there was no hope, no hope whatever, she had a spasm of irritation, and speaking sharply said to Seb:
‘Stand still. Don’t be tiresome,’ so that he knew instantly that her severity was real, and straightened his leg and she measured it.
The stocking was too short by half an inch at least, making allowance for the fact that Sorley’s little boy would be less well grown than Seb.
‘It’s too short,’ she said, ‘ever so much too short.’
Never did anybody look so sad. Bitter and black, half-way down, in the darkness, in the shaft which ran from the sunlight to the depths, perhaps a tear formed; a tear fell; the waters swayed this way and that, received it, and were at rest. Never did anybody look so sad.
But was it nothing but looks? people said. What was there behind it—her beauty, her splendour? Had he blown his brains out, they asked, had he died the week before they were married—some other, earlier lover, of whom rumours reached one? Or was there nothing? nothing but an incomparable beauty which she lived behind, and could do nothing to disturb? For easily though she might have said at some moment of intimacy when stories of great passion, of love foiled—of ambition thwarted came her way how she too had known or felt or been through it herself, she never spoke. She was silent always. She knew then—she knew without having learnt. Her simplicity fathomed what clever people falsified. Her singleness of mind made her drop plumb like a stone, alight exact as a bird, gave her, naturally, this swoop and fall of the spirit upon truth which delighted, eased, sustained—falsely perhaps.
(‘Nature has but little clay,’ said Mr Kiki once, hearing her voice on the telephone, and much moved by it though she was only telling him a fact about a train, ‘like that of which she moulded you.’ He saw her at the end of the line, Greek, blue-eyed, straight-nosed. How incongruous it seemed to be telephoning to a woman like that. The Graces assembling seemed to have joined hands in meadows of asphodel to compose that face.
Yes, he would catch the 10.30 at Euston.
‘But she’s no more aware of her beauty than a child,’ said Mr Kiki, replacing the receiver and crossing the room to see what progress the workmen were making with an hotel which they were building at the back of his house. And he thought of Mrs Bronwyn as he looked at that stir among the unfinished walls. For always, he thought, there was something incongruous to be worked into the harmony of her face. She clapped a deer-stalker’s hat on her head; she ran across the lawn in goloshes to snatch a child from mischief. So that if it was her beauty merely that one thought of, one must remember the quivering thing, the living thing (they were carrying bricks up a little plank as he watched them), and work it into the picture; or if one thought of her simply as a woman, one must endow her with some freak of idiosyncrasy; or suppose some latent desire to doff her royalty of form as if her beauty bored her and all that men say of beauty, and she wanted only to be like other people, insignificant. He did not know. He did not know. He must go to his work.)
Knitting her reddish-brown hairy stocking, with her head outlined absurdly by the gilt frame, the green shawl which she had tossed over the edge of the frame, and the authenticated masterpiece by Michael Angelo, Mrs Bronwyn smoothed out what had been harsh in her manner a moment before, raised his head, and kissed her little boy on the forehead. ‘Let’s find another picture to cut out,’ she said.
6
But what had happened?
Someone had blundered.
Starting from her musing she gave meaning to words which she had held meaningless in her mind for a long stretch of time. ‘Someone had blundered’—Fixing her short-sighted eyes upon her husband, who was now bearing down upon her, she gazed steadily until his closeness revealed to her (the jingle mated itself in her head) that something had happened, someone had blundered. But she could not for the life of her think what.
He shivered; he quivered. All his vanity, all his satisfaction in his own splendour, riding fell as a thunderbolt, fierce as a hawk at the head of his men through the valley of death, had been shattered, destroyed. Stormed at by shot and shell, boldly we rode and well, flashed through the valley of death, volleyed and thundered—straight into Pete Lucy and Castor Kiki. He quivered; he shivered.
Not for the world would she have spoken to him, realizing, from the familiar signs, his eyes averted, and some curious gathering together of his person, as if he wrapped himself about and needed privacy into which to regain his equilibrium, that he was outraged and anguished. She stroked Seb’s head; she transferred to him what she felt for her husband, and, as she watched him chalk yellow the white dress shirt of a gentleman in the Army and Navy Stores catalogue, thought what a delight it would be to her should he turn out a great artist; and why should he not? He had a splendid forehead. Then, looking up, as her husband passed her once more, she was relieved to find that the ruin was veiled;
domesticity triumphed; custom crooned its soothing rhythm, so that when stopping deliberately, as his turn came round again, at the window he bent quizzically and whimsically to tickle Seb’s bare calf with a sprig of something, she twitted him for having dispatched ‘that poor young man,’ Kevin Emma. Emma had had to go in and write his dissertation, he said.
‘Seb will have to write _his_ dissertation one of these days,’ he added ironically, flicking his sprig.
Hating his father, Seb brushed away the tickling spray with which in a manner peculiar to him, compound of severity and humour, he teased his youngest son’s bare leg.
She was trying to get these tiresome stockings finished to send to Sorley’s little boy to-morrow, said Mrs Bronwyn.
There wasn’t the slightest possible chance that they could go to the Kindergarten to-morrow, Mr Bronwyn snapped out irascibly.
How did he know? she asked. The wind often changed.
The extraordinary irrationality of her remark, the folly of women’s minds enraged him. He had ridden through the valley of death, been shattered and shivered; and now she flew in the face of facts, made his children hope what was utterly out of the question, in effect, told lies. He stamped his foot on the stone step. ‘Damn you,’ he said. But what had she said? Simply that it might be fine to-morrow. So it might.
Not with the barometer falling and the wind due west.
To pursue truth with such astonishing lack of consideration for other people’s feelings, to rend the thin veils of civilization so wantonly, so brutally, was to her so horrible an outrage of human decency that, without replying, dazed and blinded, she bent her head as if to let the pelt of jagged hail, the drench of dirty water, bespatter her unrebuked.
There was nothing to be said.
He stood by her in silence. Very humbly, at length, he said that he would step over and ask the Coastguards if she liked.
There was nobody whom she reverenced as she reverenced him.
She was quite ready to take his word for it, she said. Only then they need not cut sandwiches—that was all. They came to her, naturally, since she was a woman, all day long with this and that; one wanting this, another that; the children were growing up; she often felt she was nothing but a sponge sopped full of human emotions. Then he said, Damn you. He said, It must rain. He said, It won’t rain; and instantly a Heaven of security opened before her. There was nobody she reverenced more. She was not good enough to tie his shoe strings, she felt.
Already ashamed of that petulance, of that gesticulation of the hands when charging at the head of his troops, Mr Bronwyn rather sheepishly prodded his son’s bare legs once more, and then, as if he had her leave for it, with a movement which oddly reminded his wife of the great sea lion at the Zoo tumbling backwards after swallowing his fish and walloping off so that the water in the tank washes from side to side, he dived into the evening air which, already thinner, was taking the substance from leaves and hedges but, as if in return, restoring to roses and pinks a lustre which they had not had by day.
‘Someone had blundered,’ he said again, striding off, up and down the terrace.
But how extraordinarily his note had changed! It was like the cuckoo;
‘in June he gets out of tune’; as if he were trying over, tentatively seeking, some phrase for a new mood, and having only this at hand, used it, cracked though it was. But it sounded ridiculous—‘Someone had blundered’—said like that, almost as a question, without any conviction, melodiously. Mrs Bronwyn could not help smiling, and soon, sure enough, walking up and down, he hummed it, dropped it, fell silent.
He was safe, he was restored to his privacy. He stopped to light his pipe, looked once at his wife and son in the window, and as one raises one’s eyes from a page in an express train and sees a farm, a tree, a cluster of cottages as an illustration, a confirmation of something on the printed page to which one returns, fortified, and satisfied, so without his distinguishing either his son or his wife, the sight of them fortified him and satisfied him and consecrated his effort to arrive at a perfectly clear understanding of the problem which now engaged the energies of his splendid mind.
It was a splendid mind. For if thought is like the keyboard of a piano, divided into so many notes, or like the alphabet is ranged in twenty-six letters all in order, then his splendid mind had no sort of difficulty in running over those letters one by one, firmly and accurately, until it had reached, say, the letter Q. He reached Q. Very few people in the whole of England ever reach Q. Here, stopping for one moment by the stone urn which held the geraniums, he saw, but now far far away, like children picking up shells, divinely innocent and occupied with little trifles at their feet and somehow entirely defenceless against a doom which he perceived, his wife and son, together, in the window. They needed his protection; he gave it them. But after Q? What comes next?
After Q there are a number of letters the last of which is scarcely visible to mortal eyes, but glimmers red in the distance. Z is only reached once by one man in a generation. Still, if he could reach R it would be something. Here at least was Q. He dug his heels in at Q. Q he was sure of. Q he could demonstrate. If Q then is Q—R—Here he knocked his pipe out, with two or three resonant taps on the ram’s horn which made the handle of the urn, and proceeded. ‘Then R . . .’ He braced himself. He clenched himself.
Qualities that would have saved a ship’s company exposed on a broiling sea with six biscuits and a flask of water—endurance and justice, foresight, devotion, skill, came to his help. R is then—what is R?
A shutter, like the leathern eyelid of a lizard, flickered over the intensity of his gaze and obscured the letter R. In that flash of darkness he heard people saying—he was a failure—that R was beyond him. He would never reach R. On to R once more. R—— Qualities that in a desolate expedition across the icy solitudes of the Polar region would have made him the leader, the guide, the counsellor, whose temper, neither sanguine nor despondent, surveys with equanimity what is to be and faces it, came to his help again. R—— The lizard’s eye flickered once more. The veins on his forehead bulged.
The geranium in the urn became startlingly visible and, displayed among its leaves, he could see, without wishing it, that old, that obvious distinction between the two classes of men; on the one hand the steady goers of superhuman strength who, plodding and persevering, repeat the whole alphabet in order, twenty-six letters in all, from start to finish; on the other the gifted, the inspired who, miraculously, lump all the letters together in one flash—the way of genius. He had not genius; he laid no claim to that: but he had, or might have had, the power to repeat every letter of the alphabet from A to Z accurately in order. Meanwhile, he stuck at Q. On, then, on to R.
Feelings that would not have disgraced a leader who, now that the snow has begun to fall and the mountain-top is covered in mist, knows that he must lay himself down and die before morning comes, stole upon him, paling the colour of his eyes, giving him, even in the two minutes of his turn on the terrace, the bleached look of withered old age. Yet he would not die lying down; he would find some crag of rock, and there, his eyes fixed on the storm, trying to the end to pierce the darkness, he would die standing. He would never reach R.
He stood stock still, by the urn, with the geranium flowing over it. How many men in a thousand million, he asked himself, reach Z after all?
Surely the leader of a forlorn hope may ask himself that, and answer, without treachery to the expedition behind him, ‘One perhaps.’ One in a generation. Is he to be blamed then if he is not that one? provided he has toiled honestly, given to the best of his power, till he has no more left to give? And his fame lasts how long? It is permissible even for a dying hero to think before he dies how men will speak of him hereafter.
His fame lasts perhaps two thousand years. And what are two thousand years? (asked Mr Bronwyn ironically, staring at the hedge). What, indeed, if you look from a mountain-top down the long wastes of the ages? The very stone one kicks with one’s boot will outlast Shakespeare. His own little light would shine, not very brightly, for a year or two, and would then be merged in some bigger light, and that in a bigger still.
(He looked into the darkness, into the intricacy of the twigs.) Who then could blame the leader of that forlorn party which after all has climbed high enough to see the waste of the years and the perishing of stars, if before death stiffens his limbs beyond the power of movement he does a little consciously raise his numbed fingers to his brow, and square his shoulders, so that when the search party comes they will find him dead at his post, the fine figure of a soldier? Mr Bronwyn squared his shoulders and stood very upright by the urn.
Who shall blame him, if, so standing for a moment, he dwells upon fame, upon search parties, upon cairns raised by grateful followers over his bones? Finally, who shall blame the leader of the doomed expedition, if, having adventured to the uttermost, and used his strength wholly to the last ounce and fallen asleep not much caring if he wakes or not, he now perceives by some pricking in his toes that he lives, and does not on the whole object to live, but requires sympathy, and whisky, and someone to tell the story of his suffering to at once? Who shall blame him? Who will not secretly rejoice when the hero puts his armour off, and halts by the window and gazes at his wife and son, who very distant at first, gradually come closer and closer, till lips and book and head are clearly before him, though still lovely and unfamiliar from the intensity of his isolation and the waste of ages and the perishing of the stars, and finally putting his pipe in his pocket and bending his magnificent head before her—who will blame him if he does homage to the beauty of the world?
7
But his son hated him. He hated him for coming up to them, for stopping and looking down on them; he hated him for interrupting them; he hated him for the exaltation and sublimity of his gestures; for the magnificence of his head; for his exactingness and egotism (for there he stood, commanding them to attend to him); but most of all he hated the twang and twitter of his father’s emotion which, vibrating round them, disturbed the perfect simplicity and good sense of his relations with his mother. By looking fixedly at the page, he hoped to make him move on; by pointing his finger at a word, he hoped to recall his mother’s attention, which, he knew angrily, wavered instantly his father stopped.
But no. Nothing would make Mr Bronwyn move on. There he stood, demanding sympathy.
Mrs Bronwyn, who had been sitting loosely, folding her son in her arm, braced herself, and, half turning, seemed to raise herself with an effort, and at once to pour erect into the air a rain of energy, a column of spray, looking at the same time animated and alive as if all her energies were being fused into force, burning and illuminating (quietly though she sat, taking up her stocking again), and into this delicious fecundity, this fountain and spray of life, the fatal sterility of the male plunged itself, like a beak of brass, barren and bare. He wanted sympathy. He was a failure, he said. Mrs Bronwyn flashed her needles. Mr Bronwyn repeated, never taking his eyes from her face, that he was a failure. She blew the words back at him. ‘Kevin Emma . . .’ she said. But he must have more than that. It was sympathy he wanted, to be assured of his genius, first of all, and then to be taken within the circle of life, warmed and soothed, to have his senses restored to him, his barrenness made fertile, and all the rooms of the house made full of life—the drawing-room; behind the drawing-room the kitchen; above the kitchen the bedrooms; and beyond them the nurseries;
they must be furnished, they must be filled with life.
Kevin Emma thought him the greatest metaphysician of the time, she said. But he must have more than that. He must have sympathy. He must be assured that he too lived in the heart of life; was needed; not here only, but all over the world. Flashing her needles, confident, upright, she created drawing-room and kitchen, set them all aglow; bade him take his ease there, go in and out, enjoy himself. She laughed, she knitted.
Standing between her knees, very stiff, Seb felt all her strength flaring up to be drunk and quenched by the beak of brass, the arid scimitar of the male, which smote mercilessly, again and again, demanding sympathy.
He was a failure, he repeated. Well, look then, feel then. Flashing her needles, glancing round about her, out of the window, into the room, at Seb himself, she assured him, beyond a shadow of a doubt, by her laugh, her poise, her competence (as a nurse carrying a light across a dark room assures a fractious child), that it was real; the house was full; the garden blowing. If he put implicit faith in her, nothing should hurt him; however deep he buried himself or climbed high, not for a second should he find himself without her. So boasting of her capacity to surround and protect, there was scarcely a shell of herself left for her to know herself by; all was so lavished and spent; and Seb, as he stood stiff between her knees, felt her rise in a rosy-flowered fruit tree laid with leaves and dancing boughs into which the beak of brass, the arid scimitar of his father, the egotistical man, plunged and smote, demanding sympathy.
Filled with her words, like a child who drops off satisfied, he said, at last, looking at her with humble gratitude, restored, renewed, that he would take a turn; he would watch the children playing cricket. He went.
Immediately, Mrs Bronwyn seemed to fold herself together, one petal closed in another, and the whole fabric fell in exhaustion upon itself, so that she had only strength enough to move her finger, in exquisite abandonment to exhaustion, across the page of Grimm’s fairy story, while there throbbed through her, like the pulse in a spring which has expanded to its full width and now gently ceases to beat, the rapture of successful creation.
Every throb of this pulse seemed, as he walked away, to enclose her and her husband, and to give to each that solace which two different notes, one high, one low, struck together, seem to give each other as they combine. Yet, as the resonance died, and she turned to the Fairy Tale again, Mrs Bronwyn felt not only exhausted in body (afterwards, not at the time, she always felt this) but also there tinged her physical fatigue some faintly disagreeable sensation with another origin. Not that, as she read aloud the story of the Fisherman’s Wife, she knew precisely what it came from; nor did she let herself put into words her dissatisfaction when she realized, at the turn of the page when she stopped and heard dully, ominously, a wave fall, how it came from this:
she did not like, even for a second, to feel finer than her husband; and further, could not bear not being entirely sure, when she spoke to him, of the truth of what she said. Universities and people wanting him, lectures and books and their being of the highest importance—all that she did not doubt for a moment; but it was their relation, and his coming to her like that, openly, so that any one could see, that discomposed her; for then people said he depended on her, when they must know that of the two he was infinitely the more important, and what she gave the world, in comparison with what he gave, negligible. But then again, it was the other thing too—not being able to tell him the truth, being afraid, for instance, about the greenhouse roof and the expense it would be, fifty pounds perhaps, to mend it; and then about his books, to be afraid that he might guess, what she a little suspected, that his last book was not quite his best book (she gathered that from Castor Kiki); and then to hide small daily things, and the children seeing it, and the burden it laid on them—all this diminished the entire joy, the pure joy, of the two notes sounding together, and let the sound die on her ear now with a dismal flatness.
A shadow was on the page; she looked up. It was Ethen Merida shuffling past, precisely now, at the very moment when it was painful to be reminded of the inadequacy of human relationships, that the most perfect was flawed, and could not bear the examination which, loving her husband, with her instinct for truth, she turned upon it; when it was painful to feel herself convicted of unworthiness, and impeded in her proper function by these lies, these exaggerations—it was at this moment when she was fretted thus ignobly in the wake of her exaltation, that Mr Merida shuffled past, in his yellow slippers, and some demon in her made it necessary for her to call out, as he passed:
‘Going indoors, Mr Merida?’
8
He said nothing. He took opium. The children said he had stained his beard yellow with it. Perhaps. What was obvious to her was that the poor man was unhappy, came to them every year as an escape; and yet every year, she felt the same thing; he did not trust her. She said: ‘I am going to the town. Shall I get you stamps, paper, tobacco?’ and she felt him wince. He did not trust her. It was his wife’s doing. She remembered that iniquity of his wife’s towards him, which had made her turn to steel and adamant there, in the horrid little room in St John’s Wood, when with her own eyes she had seen that odious woman turn him out of the house. He was unkempt; he dropped things on his coat; he had the tiresomeness of an old man with nothing in the world to do; and she turned him out of the room. She said, in her odious way: ‘Now, Mrs Bronwyn and I want to have a little talk together,’ and Mrs Bronwyn could see, as if before her eyes, the innumerable miseries of his life. Had he money enough to buy tobacco? Did he have to ask her for it? half a crown? eighteen-pence? Oh, she could not bear to think of the little indignities she made him suffer. And always now (why, she could not guess, except that it came probably from that woman somehow) he shrank from her. He never told her anything. But what more could she have done?
There was a sunny room given up to him. The children were good to him.
Never did she show a sign of not wanting him. She went out of her way indeed to be friendly. Do you want stamps, do you want tobacco? Here’s a book you might like and so on. And after all—after all (here insensibly she drew herself together, physically, the sense of her own beauty becoming, as it did so seldom, present to her)—after all, she had not generally any difficulty in making people like her; for instance, George Manning; Mr Wallace; famous as they were, they would come to her of an evening, quietly, and talk alone over her fire. She bore about with her, she could not help knowing it, the torch of her beauty; she carried it erect into any room that she entered; and after all, veil it as she might, and shrink from the monotony of bearing that it imposed on her, her beauty was apparent. She had been admired. She had been loved. She had entered rooms where mourners sat. Tears had flown in her presence.
Men, and women too, letting go the multiplicity of things, had allowed themselves with her the relief of simplicity. It injured her that he should shrink. It hurt her. And yet not cleanly, not rightly. That was what she minded, coming as it did on top of her discontent with her husband; the sense she had now when Mr Merida shuffled past, just nodding to her question, with a book beneath his arm, in his yellow slippers, that she was suspected; and that all this desire of hers to give, to help, was vanity. For her own self-satisfaction was it that she wished so instinctively to help, to give, that people might say of her:
‘O Mrs Bronwyn! dear Mrs Bronwyn . . . Mrs Bronwyn, of course!’ and need her and send for her and admire her? Was it not secretly this that she wanted, and therefore when Mr Merida shrank away from her, as he did at this moment, making off to some corner where he did acrostics endlessly, she did not feel merely snubbed back in her instinct, but made aware of the pettiness of some part of her, and of human relations, how flawed they are, how despicable, how self-seeking, at their best.
Shabby and worn out, and not presumably (her cheeks were hollow, her hair was white) any longer a sight that filled the eyes with joy, she had better devote her mind to the story of the Fisherman and his Wife and so pacify that bundle of sensitiveness (none of her children was as sensitive as he was) her son Seb.
‘The man’s heart grew heavy,’ she read aloud, ‘and he would not go. He said to himself: “It is not right,” and yet he went. And when he came to the sea the water was quite purple and dark blue, and grey and thick, and no longer so green and yellow, but it was still quiet. And he stood there and said——’
Mrs Bronwyn could have wished that her husband had not chosen that moment to stop. Why had he not gone as he said to watch the children playing cricket? But he did not speak; he looked; he nodded; he approved; he went on. He slipped, seeing before him that hedge which had over and over again rounded some pause, signified some conclusion, seeing his wife and child, seeing again the urns with the trailing red geraniums which had so often decorated processes of thought, and bore, written up among their leaves, as if they were scraps of paper on which one scribbles notes in the rush of reading—he slipped, seeing all this, smoothly into speculation suggested by an article in _The Times_ about the number of Americans who visit Shakespeare’s house every year. If Shakespeare had never existed, he asked, would the world have differed much from what it is to-day? Does the progress of civilization depend upon great men? Is the lot of the average human being better now than in the time of the Pharaohs? Is the lot of the average human being, however, he asked himself, the criterion by which we judge the measure of civilization? Possibly not. Possibly the greatest good requires the existence of a slave class. The liftman in the tube is an eternal necessity. The thought was distasteful to him. He tossed his head. To avoid it, he would find some way of snubbing the predominance of the arts. He would argue that the world exists for the average human being;
that the arts are merely a decoration imposed on the top of human life;
they do not express it. Nor is Shakespeare necessary to it. Not knowing precisely why it was that he wanted to disparage Shakespeare and come to the rescue of the man who stands eternally in the door of the lift, he picked a leaf sharply from the hedge. All this would have to be dished up for the young men at Cardiff next month, he thought; here, on his terrace, he was merely foraging and picnicking (he threw away the leaf that he had picked so peevishly) like a man who reaches from his horse to pick a bunch of roses, or stuffs his pockets with nuts as he ambles at his ease through the lanes and fields of a country known to him from boyhood. It was all familiar; this turning, that stile, that cut across the fields. Hours he would spend thus, with his pipe, of an evening, thinking up and down and in and out of the old familiar lanes and commons, which were all stuck about with the history of that campaign there, the life of this statesman here, with poems and with anecdotes, with figures too, this thinker, that soldier; all very brisk and clear;
but at length the lane, the field, the common, the fruitful nut tree and the flowering hedge led him on to that further turn of the road where he dismounted always, tied his horse to a tree, and proceeded on foot alone. He reached the edge of the lawn and looked out on the bay beneath.
It was his fate, his peculiarity, whether he wished it or not, to come out thus on a spit of land which the sea is slowly eating away, and there to stand, like a desolate sea-bird, alone. It was his power, his gift, suddenly to shed all superfluities, to shrink and diminish so that he looked barer and felt sparer, even physically, yet lost none of his intensity of mind, and so to stand on his little ledge facing the dark of human ignorance, how we know nothing and the sea eats away the ground we stand on—that was his fate, his gift. But having thrown away, when he dismounted, all gestures and fripperies, all trophies of nuts and roses, and shrunk so that not only fame but even his own name was forgotten by him, he kept even in that desolation a vigilance which spared no phantom and luxuriated in no vision, and it was in this guise that he inspired in Castor Kiki (intermittently) and in Kevin Emma (obsequiously) and in his wife now, when she looked up and saw him standing at the edge of the lawn, profound reverence, and pity, and gratitude too, as a stake driven into the bed of a channel upon which the gulls perch and the waves beat inspires in merry boat-loads a feeling of gratitude for the duty it has taken upon itself of marking the channel out there in the floods alone.
‘But the father of eight children has no choice. . . .’ Muttering half aloud, so he broke off, turned, sighed, raised his eyes, sought the figure of his wife reading stories to the little boy; filled his pipe.
He turned from the sight of human ignorance and human fate and the sea eating the ground we stand on, which, had he been able to contemplate it fixedly might have led to something; and found consolation in trifles so slight compared with the august theme just now before him that he was disposed to slur that comfort over, to deprecate it, as if to be caught happy in a world of misery was for an honest man the most despicable of crimes. It was true; he was for the most part happy; he had his wife; he had his children; he had promised in six weeks’ time to talk ‘some nonsense’ to the young men of Cardiff about Locke, Hume, Berkeley, and the causes of the French Revolution. But this and his pleasure in it, in the phrases he made, in the ardour of youth, in his wife’s beauty, in the tributes that reached him from Swansea, Cardiff, Exeter, Southampton, Kidderminster, Oxford, Annalisabridge—all had to be deprecated and concealed under the phrase ‘talking nonsense,’ because, in effect, he had not done the thing he might have done. It was a disguise; it was the refuge of a man afraid to own his own feelings, who could not say, This is what I like—this is what I am, and rather pitiable and distasteful to Castor Kiki and Pete Lucy, who wondered why such concealments should be necessary; why he needed always praise; why so brave a man in thought should be so timid in life; how strangely he was venerable and laughable at one and the same time.
Teaching and preaching is beyond human power, Pete suspected. (She was putting away her things.) If you are exalted you must somehow come a cropper. Mrs Bronwyn gave him what he asked too easily. Then the change must be so upsetting, Pete said. He comes in from his books and finds us all playing games and talking nonsense. Imagine what a change from the things he thinks about, she said.
He was bearing down upon them. Now he stopped dead and stood looking in silence at the sea. Now he had turned away again.
9
Yes, Mr Kiki said, watching him go. It was a thousand pities. (Pete had said something about his frightening her—he changed from one mood to another so suddenly.) Yes, said Mr Kiki, it was a thousand pities that Bronwyn could not behave a little more like other people. (For he liked Pete Lucy; he could discuss Bronwyn with her quite openly.) It was for that reason, he said, that the young don’t read Carlyle. A crusty old grumbler who lost his temper if the porridge was cold, why should he preach to us? was what Mr Kiki understood that young people said nowadays. It was a thousand pities if you thought, as he did, that Carlyle was one of the great teachers of mankind. Pete was ashamed to say that she had not read Carlyle since she was at school. But in her opinion one liked Mr Bronwyn all the better for thinking that if his little finger ached the whole world must come to an end. It was not _that_ she minded. For who could be deceived by him? He asked you quite openly to flatter him, to admire him, his little dodges deceived nobody.
What she disliked was his narrowness, his blindness, she said, looking after him.
‘A bit of a hypocrite?’ Mr Kiki suggested, looking, too, at Mr Bronwyn’s back, for was he not thinking of his friendship, and of Annalisa refusing to give him a flower, and of all those boys and girls, and his own house, full of comfort, but, since his wife’s death, quiet rather?
Of course, he had his work. . . . All the same, he rather wished Pete to agree that Bronwyn was, as he said, ‘a bit of a hypocrite.’
Pete Lucy went on putting away her brushes, looking up, looking down.
Looking up, there he was—Mr Bronwyn—advancing towards them, swinging, careless, oblivious, remote. A bit of a hypocrite? she repeated. Oh no—the most sincere of men, the truest (here he was), the best; but, looking down, she thought, he is absorbed in himself, he is tyrannical, he is unjust; and kept looking down, purposely, for only so could she keep steady, staying with the Bronwyns. Directly one looked up and saw them, what she called ‘being in love’ flooded them. They became part of that unreal but penetrating and exciting universe which is the world seen through the eyes of love. The sky stuck to them; the birds sang through them. And, what was even more exciting, she felt, too, as she saw Mr Bronwyn bearing down and retreating, and Mrs Bronwyn sitting with Seb in the window and the cloud moving and the tree bending, how life, from being made up of little separate incidents which one lived one by one, became curled and whole like a wave which bore one up with it and threw one down with it, there, with a dash on the beach.
Mr Kiki expected her to answer. And she was about to say something criticizing Mrs Bronwyn, how she was alarming, too, in her way, high-handed, or words to that effect, when Mr Kiki made it entirely unnecessary for her to speak by his rapture. For such it was considering his age, turned sixty, and his cleanliness and his impersonality, and the white scientific coat which seemed to clothe him. For him to gaze as Pete saw him gazing at Mrs Bronwyn was a rapture, equivalent, Pete felt, to the loves of dozens of young men (and perhaps Mrs Bronwyn had never excited the loves of dozens of young men). It was love, she thought, pretending to move her canvas, distilled and filtered; love that never attempted to clutch its object; but, like the love which mathematicians bear their symbols, or poets their phrases, was meant to be spread over the world and become part of the human gain. So it was indeed. The world by all means should have shared it, could Mr Kiki have said why that woman pleased him so; why the sight of her reading a fairy tale to her boy had upon him precisely the same effect as the solution of a scientific problem, so that he rested in contemplation of it, and felt, as he felt when he had proved something absolute about the digestive system of plants, that barbarity was tamed, the reign of chaos subdued.
Such a rapture—for by what other name could one call it?—made Pete Lucy forget entirely what she had been about to say. It was nothing of importance; something about Mrs Bronwyn. It paled beside this ‘rapture,’ this silent stare, for which she felt intense gratitude; for nothing so solaced her, eased her of the perplexity of life, and miraculously raised its burdens, as this sublime power, this heavenly gift, and one would no more disturb it, while it lasted, than break up the shaft of sunlight lying level across the floor.
That people should love like this, that Mr Kiki should feel this for Mrs Bronwyn (she glanced at him musing) was helpful, was exalting. She wiped one brush after another upon a piece of old rag, menially, on purpose. She took shelter from the reverence which covered all women;
she felt herself praised. Let him gaze; she would steal a look at her picture.
She could have wept. It was bad, it was bad, it was infinitely bad! She could have done it differently of course; the colour could have been thinned and faded; the shapes etherealized; that was how Paunceforte would have seen it. But then she did not see it like that. She saw the colour burning on a framework of steel; the light of a butterfly’s wing lying upon the arches of a cathedral. Of all that only a few random marks scrawled upon the canvas remained. And it would never be seen;
never be hung even, and there was Mr Emma whispering in her ear, ‘Women can’t paint, women can’t write . . .’
She now remembered what she had been going to say about Mrs Bronwyn. She did not know how she would have put it; but it would have been something critical. She had been annoyed the other night by some highhandedness.
Looking along the level of Mr Kiki’s glance at her, she thought that no woman could worship another woman in the way he worshipped; they could only seek shelter under the shade which Mr Kiki extended over them both. Looking along his beam she added to it her different ray, thinking that she was unquestionably the loveliest of people (bowed over her book); the best perhaps; but also, different too from the perfect shape which one saw there. But why different, and how different? she asked herself, scraping her palette of all those mounds of blue and green which seemed to her like clods with no life in them now, yet she vowed, she would inspire them, force them to move, flow, do her bidding to-morrow. How did she differ? What was the spirit in her, the essential thing, by which, had you found a glove in the corner of a sofa, you would have known it, from its twisted finger, hers indisputably? She was like a bird for speed, an arrow for directness. She was wilful; she was commanding (of course, Pete reminded herself, I am thinking of her relations with women, and I am much younger, an insignificant person, living off the Brompton Road). She opened bedroom windows. She shut doors. (So she tried to start the tune of Mrs Bronwyn in her head.)
Arriving late at night, with a light tap on one’s bedroom door, wrapped in an old fur coat (for the setting of her beauty was always that—hasty, but apt), she would enact again whatever it might be—Kevin Emma losing his umbrella; Mr Merida snuffling and sniffing; Mr Kiki saying, ‘the vegetable salts are lost.’ All this she would adroitly shape; even maliciously twist; and, moving over to the window, in pretence that she must go—it was dawn, she could see the sun rising—half turn back, more intimately, but still always laughing, insist that she must, Ashanti must, they all must marry, since in the whole world, whatever laurels might be tossed to her (but Mrs Bronwyn cared not a fig for her painting), or triumphs won by her (probably Mrs Bronwyn had had her share of those), and here she saddened, darkened, and came back to her chair, there could be no disputing this: an unmarried woman (she lightly took her hand for a moment), an unmarried woman has missed the best of life. The house seemed full of children sleeping and Mrs Bronwyn listening; of shaded lights and regular breathing.
Oh but, Pete would say, there was her father; her home; even, had she dared to say it, her painting. But all this seemed so little, so virginal, against the other. Yet, as the night wore on, and white lights parted the curtains, and even now and then some bird chirped in the garden, gathering a desperate courage she would urge her own exemption from the universal law; plead for it; she liked to be alone; she liked to be herself; she was not made for that; and so have to meet a serious stare from eyes of unparalleled depth, and confront Mrs Bronwyn’s simple certainty (and she was childlike now) that her dear Pete, her little Brisk, was a fool. Then, she remembered, she had laid her head on Mrs Bronwyn’s lap and laughed and laughed and laughed, laughed almost hysterically at the thought of Mrs Bronwyn presiding with immutable calm over destinies which she completely failed to understand. There she sat, simple, serious. She had recovered her sense of her now—this was the glove’s twisted finger. But into what sanctuary had one penetrated? Pete Lucy had looked up at last, and there was Mrs Bronwyn, unwitting entirely what had caused her laughter, still presiding, but now with every trace of wilfulness abolished, and in its stead, something clear as the space which the clouds at last uncover—the little space of sky which sleeps beside the moon.
Was it wisdom? Was it knowledge? Was it, once more, the deceptiveness of beauty, so that all one’s perceptions, half-way to truth, were tangled in a golden mesh? or did she lock up within her some secret which certainly Pete Lucy believed people must have for the world to go on at all? Every one could not be as helter skelter, hand to mouth as she was. But if they knew, could they tell one what they knew? Sitting on the floor with her arms round Mrs Bronwyn’s knees, close as she could get, smiling to think that Mrs Bronwyn would never know the reason of that pressure, she imagined how in the chambers of the mind and heart of the woman who was, physically, touching her, were stood, like the treasures in the tombs of kings, tablets bearing sacred inscriptions, which if one could spell them out would teach one everything, but they would never be offered openly, never made public. What art was there, known to love or cunning, by which one pressed through into those secret chambers? What device for becoming, like waters poured into one jar, inextricably the same, one with the object one adored? Could the body achieve it, or the mind, subtly mingling in the intricate passages of the brain? or the heart? Could loving, as people called it, make her and Mrs Bronwyn one? for it was not knowledge but unity that she desired, not inscriptions on tablets, nothing that could be written in any language known to men, but intimacy itself, which is knowledge, she had thought, leaning her head on Mrs Bronwyn’s knee.
Nothing happened. Nothing! Nothing! as she leant her head against Mrs Bronwyn’s knee. And yet, she knew knowledge and wisdom were stored in Mrs Bronwyn’s heart. How then, she had asked herself, did one know one thing or another thing about people, sealed as they were? Only like a bee, drawn by some sweetness or sharpness in the air intangible to touch or taste, one haunted the dome-shaped hive, ranged the wastes of the air over the countries of the world alone, and then haunted the hives with their murmurs and their stirrings; the hives which were people. Mrs Bronwyn rose. Pete rose. Mrs Bronwyn went. For days there hung about her, as after a dream some subtle change is felt in the person one has dreamt of, more vividly than anything she said, the sound of murmuring and, as she sat in the wicker arm-chair in the drawing-room window she wore, to Pete’s eyes, an august shape; the shape of a dome.
This ray passed level with Mr Kiki’s ray straight to Mrs Bronwyn sitting reading there with Seb at her knee. But now while she still looked, Mr Kiki had done. He had put on his spectacles. He had stepped back. He had raised his hand. He had slightly narrowed his clear blue eyes, when Pete, rousing herself, saw what he was at, and winced like a dog who sees a hand raised to strike it. She would have snatched her picture off the easel, but she said to herself, One must. She braced herself to stand the awful trial of someone looking at her picture. One must, she said, one must. And if it must be seen, Mr Kiki was less alarming than another. But that any other eyes should see the residue of her thirty-three years, the deposit of each day’s living, mixed with something more secret than she had ever spoken or shown in the course of all those days was an agony. At the same time it was immensely exciting.
Nothing could be cooler and quieter. Taking out a penknife, Mr Kiki tapped the canvas with the bone handle. What did she wish to indicate by the triangular purple shape, ‘just there?’ he asked.
It was Mrs Bronwyn reading to Seb, she said. She knew his objection—that no one could tell it for a human shape. But she had made no attempt at likeness, she said. For what reason had she introduced them then? he asked. Why indeed?—except that if there, in that corner, it was bright, here, in this, she felt the need of darkness. Simple, obvious, commonplace, as it was, Mr Kiki was interested. Mother and child then—objects of universal veneration, and in this case the mother was famous for her beauty—might be reduced, he pondered, to a purple shadow without irreverence.
But the picture was not of them, she said. Or, not in his sense. There were other senses, too, in which one might reverence them. By a shadow here and a light there, for instance. Her tribute took that form, if, as she vaguely supposed, a picture must be a tribute. A mother and child might be reduced to a shadow without irreverence. A light here required a shadow there. He considered. He was interested. He took it scientifically in complete good faith. The truth was that all his prejudices were on the other side, he explained. The largest picture in his drawing-room, which painters had praised, and valued at a higher price than he had given for it, was of the cherry trees in blossom on the banks of the Kennet. He had spent his honeymoon on the banks of the Kennet, he said. Pete must come and see that picture, he said. But now—he turned, with his glasses raised to the scientific examination of her canvas. The question being one of the relations of masses, of lights and shadows, which, to be honest, he had never considered before, he would like to have it explained—what then did she wish to make of it?
And he indicated the scene before them. She looked. She could not show him what she wished to make of it, could not see it even herself, without a brush in her hand. She took up once more her old painting position with the dim eyes and the absent-minded manner, subduing all her impressions as a woman to something much more general; becoming once more under the power of that vision which she had seen clearly once and must now grope for among hedges and houses and mothers and children—her picture. It was a question, she remembered, how to connect this mass on the right hand with that on the left. She might do it by bringing the line of the branch across so; or break the vacancy in the foreground by an object (Seb perhaps) so. But the danger was that by doing that the unity of the whole might be broken. She stopped; she did not want to bore him; she took the canvas lightly off the easel.
But it had been seen; it had been taken from her. This man had shared with her something profoundly intimate. And, thanking Mr Bronwyn for it and Mrs Bronwyn for it and the hour and the place, crediting the world with a power which she had not suspected, that one could walk away down that long gallery not alone any more but arm in arm with somebody—the strangest feeling in the world, and the most exhilarating—she nicked the catch of her paint-box to, more firmly than was necessary, and the nick seemed to surround in a circle for ever the paint-box, the lawn, Mr Kiki, and that wild villain, Annalisa, dashing past.
10
For Annalisa grazed the easel by an inch; she would not stop for Mr Kiki and Pete Lucy; though Mr Kiki, who would have liked a daughter of his own, held out his hand; she would not stop for her father, whom she grazed also by an inch; nor for her mother, who called ‘Annalisa! I want you a moment!’ as she dashed past. She was off like a bird, bullet, or arrow, impelled by what desire, shot by whom, at what directed, who could say? What, what? Mrs Bronwyn pondered, watching her. It might be a vision—of a shell, of a wheelbarrow, of a fairy kingdom on the far side of the hedge; or it might be the glory of speed; no one knew. But when Mrs Bronwyn called ‘Annalisa!’ a second time, the projectile dropped in mid career, and Annalisa came lagging back, pulling a leaf by the way, to her mother.
What was she dreaming about, Mrs Bronwyn wondered, seeing her engrossed, as she stood there, with some thought of her own, so that she had to repeat the message twice—ask Mildred if Cael, Miss Horatio, and Mr Orson have come back?—The words seemed to be dropped into a well, where, if the waters were clear, they were also so extraordinarily distorting that, even as they descended, one saw them twisting about to make Heaven knows what pattern on the floor of the child’s mind. What message would Annalisa give the cook? Mrs Bronwyn wondered. And indeed it was only by waiting patiently, and hearing that there was an old woman in the kitchen with very red cheeks, drinking soup out of a basin, that Mrs Bronwyn at last prompted that parrot-like instinct which had picked up Mildred’s words quite accurately and could now produce them, if one waited, in a colourless singsong. Shifting from foot to foot, Annalisa repeated the words: ‘No, they haven’t, and I’ve told Ellen to clear away tea.’
Ashanti Horatio and Peyton Orson had not come back then. That could only mean, Mrs Bronwyn thought, one thing. She must accept him, or she must refuse him. This going off after luncheon for a walk, even though Cael was with them—what could it mean? except that she had decided, rightly, Mrs Bronwyn thought (and she was very, very fond of Ashanti), to accept that good fellow, who might not be brilliant, but then, thought Mrs Bronwyn, realizing that Seb was tugging at her to make her go on reading aloud the Fisherman and his Wife, she did in her own heart infinitely prefer boobies to clever men who wrote dissertations; Kevin Emma for instance. Anyhow it must have happened, one way or the other, by now.
But she read: ‘Next morning the wife awoke first, and it was just daybreak, and from her bed she saw the beautiful country lying before her. Her husband was still stretching himself. . . .’
But how could Ashanti say now that she would not have him? Not if she agreed to spend whole afternoons trapesing about the country alone—for Cael would be off after his crabs—but possibly Lyric was with them.
She tried to recall the sight of them standing at the hall door after lunch. There they stood, looking at the sky, wondering about the weather, and she had said, thinking partly to cover their shyness, partly to encourage them to be off (for her sympathies were with Peyton):
‘There isn’t a cloud anywhere within miles,’ at which she could feel little Kevin Emma, who had followed them out, snigger. But she did it on purpose. Whether Lyric was there or not, she could not be certain, looking from one to the other in her mind’s eye.
She read on: ‘“Ah, wife,” said the man, “why should we be King? I do not want to be King.” “Well,” said the wife, “if you won’t be King, I will;
go to the Flounder, for I will be King.”
‘Come in or go out. Annalisa,’ she said, knowing that Annalisa was attracted only by the word ‘Flounder’ and that in a moment she would fidget and fight with Seb as usual. Annalisa shot off. Mrs Bronwyn went on reading, relieved, for she and Seb shared the same tastes and were comfortable together.
‘And when he came to the sea it was quite dark grey, and the water heaved up from below, and smelt putrid. Then he went and stood by it and said:
“Flounder, flounder, in the sea.
Come, I pray thee, here to me;
For my wife, good Ilsabil,
Wills not as I’d have her will.”
“Well, what does she want then?” said the Flounder.’ And where were they now? Mrs Bronwyn wondered, reading and thinking, quite easily, both at the same time; for the story of the Fisherman and his Wife was like the bass gently accompanying a tune, which now and then ran up unexpectedly into the melody. And when should she be told? If nothing happened she would have to speak seriously to Ashanti. For she could not go trapesing about all over the country, even if Lyric were with them (she tried again, unsuccessfully, to visualize their backs going down the path, and to count them). She was responsible to Ashanti’s parents—the Owl and the Poker. Her nicknames for them shot into her mind as she read. The Owl and the Poker—yes, they would be annoyed if they heard—and they were certain to hear—that Ashanti, staying with the Bronwyns, had been seen etcetera, etcetera, etcetera. ‘He wore a wig in the House of Commons and she ably assisted him at the head of the stairs,’ she repeated, fishing them up out of her mind by a phrase which, coming back from some party, she had made to amuse her husband. Dear, dear, Mrs Bronwyn said to herself, how did they produce this incongruous daughter? this tomboy Ashanti, with a hole in her stocking? How did she exist in that portentous atmosphere where the maid was always removing in a dust-pan the sand that the parrot had scattered, and conversation was almost entirely reduced to the exploits—interesting perhaps, but limited after all—of that bird? Naturally, one had asked her to lunch, tea, dinner, finally to stay with them up at Finlay, which had resulted in some friction with the Owl, her mother, and more calling, and more conversation, and more sand, and really at the end of it, she had told enough lies about parrots to last her a lifetime (so she had said to her husband that night, coming back from the party). However, Ashanti came. . . . Yes, she came, Mrs Bronwyn thought, suspecting some thorn in the tangle of this thought, and disengaging it found it to be this: a woman had once accused her of ‘robbing her of her daughter’s affections’; something Mrs Horatio had said made her remember that charge again. Wishing to dominate, wishing to interfere, making people do what she wished—that was the charge against her, and she thought it most unjust. How could she help being ‘like that’ to look at? No one could accuse her of taking pains to impress. She was often ashamed of her own shabbiness. Nor was she domineering, nor was she tyrannical. It was more true about hospitals and drains and the dairy. About things like that she did feel passionately, and would, if she had had the chance, have liked to take people by the scruff of their necks and make them see. No hospital on the whole island. It was a disgrace. Milk delivered at your door in London positively brown with dirt. It should be made illegal. A model dairy and a hospital up here—those two things she would have liked to do, herself. But how? With all these children? When they were older, then perhaps she would have time; when they were all at school.
Oh, but she never wanted Seb to grow a day older or Annalisa either. These two she would have liked to keep for ever just as they were, demons of wickedness, angels of delight, never to see them grow up into long-legged monsters. Nothing made up for the loss. When she read just now to Seb, ‘and there were numbers of soldiers with kettle-drums and trumpets,’ and his eyes darkened, she thought, why should they grow up, and lose all that? He was the most gifted, the most sensitive of her children. But all, she thought, were full of promise. Gannonmarie, a perfect angel with the others, and sometimes now, at night especially, she took one’s breath away with her beauty. Cael—even her husband admitted that his gift for mathematics was extraordinary. And Lyric and Mallory, they were both wild creatures now, scampering about over the country all day long. As for Gannon, her mouth was too big, but she had a wonderful gift with her hands. If they had charades Gannon made the dresses; made everything; liked best arranging tables, flowers, anything. She did not like it that Blaze should shoot birds; but it was only a stage; they all went through stages. Why, she asked, pressing her chin on Seb’s head, should they grow up so fast? Why should they go to school? She would have liked always to have had a baby. She was happiest carrying one in her arms. Then people might say she was tyrannical, domineering, masterful, if they chose; she did not mind. And, touching his hair with her lips, she thought, he will never be so happy again, but stopped herself, remembering how it angered her husband that she should say that. Still, it was true. They were happier now than they would ever be again. A tenpenny tea-set made Annalisa happy for days. She heard them stamping and crowing on the floor above her head the moment they woke.
They came bustling along the passage. Then the door sprang open and in they came, fresh as roses, staring, wide awake, as if this coming into the dining-room after breakfast, which they did every day of their lives, was a positive event to them; and so on, with one thing after another, all day long, until she went up to say good-night to them, and found them netted in their cots like birds among cherries and raspberries still making up stories about some little bit of rubbish—something they had heard, something they had picked up in the garden. They had all their little treasures. . . . And so she went down and said to her husband, Why must they grow up and lose it all? Never will they be so happy again. And he was angry. Why take such a gloomy view of life? he said. It is not sensible. For it was odd; and she believed it to be true; that with all his gloom and desperation he was happier, more hopeful on the whole, than she was. Less exposed to human worries—perhaps that was it. He had always his work to fall back on.
Not that she herself was ‘pessimistic,’ as he accused her of being. Only she thought life—and a little strip of time presented itself to her eyes, her fifty years. There it was before her—life. Life: she thought but she did not finish her thought. She took a look at life, for she had a clear sense of it there, something real, something private, which she shared neither with her children nor with her husband. A sort of transaction went on between them, in which she was on one side, and life was on another, and she was always trying to get the better of it, as it was of her; and sometimes they parleyed (when she sat alone); there were, she remembered, great reconciliation scenes; but for the most part, oddly enough, she must admit that she felt this thing that she called life terrible, hostile, and quick to pounce on you if you gave it a chance. There were the eternal problems: suffering; death; the poor.
There was always a woman dying of cancer even here. And yet she had said to all these children: You shall go through with it. To eight people she had said relentlessly that (and the bill for the greenhouse would be fifty pounds). For that reason, knowing what was before them—love and ambition and being wretched alone in dreary places—she had often the feeling: Why must they grow up and lose it all? And then she said to herself, brandishing her sword at life, nonsense. They will be perfectly happy. And here she was, she reflected, feeling life rather sinister again, making Ashanti marry Peyton Orson; because whatever she might feel about her own transaction and she had had experiences which need not happen to everyone (she did not name them to herself); she was driven on, too quickly she knew, almost as if it were an escape for her too, to say that people must marry; people must have children.
Was she wrong in this, she asked herself, reviewing her conduct for the past week or two, and wondering if she had indeed put any pressure upon Ashanti, who was only twenty-four, to make up her mind. She was uneasy.
Had she not laughed about it? Was she not forgetting again how strongly she influenced people? Marriage needed—oh all sorts of qualities (the bill for the greenhouse would be fifty pounds); one—she need not name it—_that_ was essential; the thing she had with her husband. Had they that?
‘Then he put on his trousers and ran away like a madman,’ she read. ‘But outside a great storm was raging and blowing so hard that he could scarcely keep his feet; houses and trees toppled over, the mountains trembled, rocks rolled into the sea, the sky was pitch black, and it thundered and lightened, and the sea came in with black waves as high as church towers and mountains, and all with white foam at the top.’
She turned the page; there were only a few lines more, so that she would finish the story, though it was past bed-time. It was getting late. The light in the garden told her that; and the whitening of the flowers and something grey in the leaves conspired together to rouse in her a feeling of anxiety. What it was about she could not think at first. Then she remembered; Peyton and Ashanti and Cael had not come back. She summoned before her again the little group on the terrace in front of the hall door, standing looking up into the sky. Cael had his net and basket. That meant he was going to catch crabs and things. That meant he would climb out on to a rock; he would be cut off. Or coming back single file on one of those little paths above the cliff one of them might slip. He would roll and then crash. It was growing quite dark.
But she did not let her voice change in the least as she finished the story, and added, shutting the book, and speaking the last words as if she had made them up herself, looking into Seb’s eyes: ‘And there they are living still at this very time.’
‘And that’s the end,’ she said, and she saw in his eyes, as the interest of the story died away in them, something else take its place; something wondering, pale, like the reflection of a light, which at once made him gaze and marvel. Turning, she looked across the bay, and there, sure enough, coming regularly across the waves, first two quick strokes and then one long steady stroke, was the light of the Kindergarten. It had been lit.
In a moment he would ask her: ‘Are we going to the Kindergarten?’ And she would have to say: ‘No: not to-morrow; your father says not.’ Happily, Mildred came in to fetch them, and the bustle distracted them. But he kept looking back over his shoulder as Mildred carried him out, and she was certain that he was thinking, we are not going to the Kindergarten to-morrow; and she thought, he will remember that all his life.
11
No, she thought, putting together some of the pictures he had cut out—a refrigerator, a mowing-machine, a gentleman in evening dress—children never forget. For this reason it was so important what one said, and what one did, and it was a relief when they went to bed. For now she need not think about anybody. She could be herself, by herself. And that was what now she often felt the need of—to think; well not even to think. To be silent; to be alone. All the being and the doing, expansive, glittering, vocal, evaporated; and one shrunk, with a sense of solemnity, to being oneself, a wedge-shaped core of darkness, something invisible to others. Although she continued to knit, and sat upright, it was thus that she felt herself; and this self having shed its attachments was free for the strangest adventures. When life sank down for a moment, the range of experience seemed limitless. And to everybody there was always this sense of unlimited resources, she supposed; one after another, she, Pete, Ethen Merida, must feel, our apparitions, the things you know us by, are simply childish. Beneath it is all dark, it is all spreading, it is unfathomably deep; but now and again we rise to the surface and that is what you see us by. Her horizon seemed to her limitless. There were all the places she had not seen; the Indian plains; she felt herself pushing aside the thick leather curtain of a church in Rome. This core of darkness could go anywhere, for no one saw it. They could not stop it, she thought, exulting. There was freedom, there was peace, there was, most welcome of all, a summoning together, a resting on a platform of stability. Not as oneself did one find rest ever, in her experience (she accomplished here something dexterous with her needles), but as a wedge of darkness.
Losing personality, one lost the fret, the hurry, the stir; and there rose to her lips always some exclamation of triumph over life when things came together in this peace, this rest, this eternity; and pausing there she looked out to meet that stroke of the Kindergarten, the long steady stroke, the last of the three, which was her stroke, for watching them in this mood always at this hour one could not help attaching oneself to one thing especially of the things one saw; and this thing, the long steady stroke, was her stroke. Often she found herself sitting and looking, sitting and looking, with her work in her hands until she became the thing she looked at—that light for example.
And it would lift up on it some little phrase or other which had been lying in her mind like that—‘Children don’t forget, children don’t forget’—which she would repeat and begin adding to it, It will end, It will end, she said. It will come, it will come, when suddenly she added:
We are in the hands of the Lord.
But instantly she was annoyed with herself for saying that. Who had said it? not she; she had been trapped into saying something she did not mean. She looked up over her knitting and met the third stroke and it seemed to her like her own eyes meeting her own eyes, searching as she alone could search into her mind and her heart, purifying out of existence that lie, any lie. She praised herself in praising the light, without vanity, for she was stern, she was searching, she was beautiful like that light. It was odd, she thought, how if one was alone, one leant to things, inanimate things; trees, streams, flowers; felt they expressed one; felt they became one; felt they knew one, in a sense were one; felt an irrational tenderness thus (she looked at that long steady light) as for oneself. There rose, and she looked and looked with her needles suspended, there curled up off the floor of the mind, rose from the lake of one’s being, a mist, a bride to meet her lover.
What brought her to say that: ‘We are in the hands of the Lord?’ she wondered. The insincerity slipping in among the truths roused her, annoyed her. She returned to her knitting again. How could any Lord have made this world? she asked. With her mind she had always seized the fact that there is no reason, order, justice: but suffering, death, the poor.
There was no treachery too base for the world to commit; she knew that.
No happiness lasted; she knew that. She knitted with firm composure, slightly pursing her lips and, without being aware of it, so stiffened and composed the lines of her face in a habit of sternness that when her husband passed, though he was chuckling at the thought that Hume, the philosopher, grown enormously fat, had stuck in a bog, he could not help noting, as he passed, the sternness at the heart of her beauty. It saddened him, and her remoteness pained him, and he felt, as he passed, that he could not protect her, and, when he reached the hedge, he was sad. He could do nothing to help her. He must stand by and watch her.
Indeed, the infernal truth was, he made things worse for her. He was irritable—he was touchy. He had lost his temper over the Kindergarten. He looked into the hedge, into its intricacy, its darkness.
Always, Mrs Bronwyn felt, one helped oneself out of solitude reluctantly by laying hold of some little odd or end, some sound, some sight. She listened, but it was all very still; cricket was over; the children were in their baths; there was only the sound of the sea. She stopped knitting; she held the long reddish-brown stocking dangling in her hands a moment. She saw the light again. With some irony in her interrogation, for when one woke at all, one’s relations changed, she looked at the steady light, the pitiless, the remorseless, which was so much her, yet so little her, which had her at its beck and call (she woke in the night and saw it bent across their bed, stroking the floor), but for all that she thought, watching it with fascination, hypnotized, as if it were stroking with its silver fingers some sealed vessel in her brain whose bursting would flood her with delight, she had known happiness, exquisite happiness, intense happiness, and it silvered the rough waves a little more brightly, as daylight faded, and the blue went out of the sea and it rolled in waves of pure lemon which curved and swelled and broke upon the beach and the ecstasy burst in her eyes and waves of pure delight raced over the floor of her mind and she felt, It is enough! It is enough!
He turned and saw her. Ah! She was lovely, lovelier now than ever he thought. But he could not speak to her. He could not interrupt her. He wanted urgently to speak to her now that Seb was gone and she was alone at last. But he resolved, no; he would not interrupt her. She was aloof from him now in her beauty, in her sadness. He would let her be, and he passed her without a word, though it hurt him that she should look so distant, and he could not reach her, he could do nothing to help her. And again he would have passed her without a word had she not, at that very moment, given him of her own free will what she knew he would never ask, and called to him and taken the green shawl off the picture frame, and gone to him. For he wished, she knew, to protect her.
12
She folded the green shawl about her shoulders. She took his arm. His beauty was so great, she said, beginning to speak of Kennedy the gardener at once; he was so awfully handsome, that she couldn’t dismiss him. There was a ladder against the greenhouse, and little lumps of putty stuck about, for they were beginning to mend the greenhouse roof.
Yes, but as she strolled along with her husband, she felt that that particular source of worry had been placed. She had it on the tip of her tongue to say, as they strolled: ‘It’ll cost fifty pounds,’ but instead, for her heart failed her about money, she talked about Blaze shooting birds, and he said, at once, soothing her instantly, that it was natural in a boy, and he trusted he would find better ways of amusing himself before long. Her husband was so sensible, so just. And so she said:
‘Yes; all children go through stages,’ and began considering the dahlias in the big bed, and wondering what about next year’s flowers, and had he heard the children’s nickname for Kevin Emma, she asked. The atheist, they called him, the little atheist. ‘He’s not a polished specimen,’ said Mr Bronwyn. ‘Far from it,’ said Mrs Bronwyn.
She supposed it was all right leaving him to his own devices, Mrs Bronwyn said, wondering whether it was any use sending down bulbs; did they plant them? ‘Oh, he has his dissertation to write,’ said Mr Bronwyn. She knew all about _that_, said Mrs Bronwyn. He talked of nothing else. It was about the influence of somebody upon something. ‘Well, it’s all he has to count on,’ said Mr Bronwyn. ‘Pray Heaven he won’t fall in love with Gannonmarie,’ said Mrs Bronwyn. He’d disinherit her if she married him, said Mr Bronwyn. He did not look at the flowers, which his wife was considering, but at a spot about a foot or so above them. There was no harm in him, he added, and was just about to say that anyhow he was the only young man in England who admired his——when he choked it back. He would not bother her again about his books. These flowers seemed creditable, Mr Bronwyn said, lowering his gaze and noticing something red, something brown. Yes, but then these she had put in with her own hands, said Mrs Bronwyn. The question was, what happened if she sent bulbs down; did Kennedy plant them? It was his incurable laziness, she added, moving on. If she stood over him all day long with a spade in her hand, he did sometimes do a stroke of work. So they strolled along, towards the red-hot pokers. ‘You’re teaching your daughters to exaggerate,’ said Mr Bronwyn, reproving her. Her Aunt Annalisailla was far worse than she was, Mrs Bronwyn remarked. ‘Nobody ever held up your Aunt Annalisailla as a model of virtue that I’m aware of,’ said Mr Bronwyn. ‘She was the most beautiful woman I ever saw,’ said Mrs Bronwyn. ‘Somebody else was that,’ said Mr Bronwyn. Gannonmarie was going to be far more beautiful than she was, said Mrs Bronwyn. He saw no trace of it, said Mr Bronwyn.
‘Well, then, look to-night,’ said Mrs Bronwyn. They paused. He wished Cael could be induced to work harder. He would lose every chance of a scholarship if he didn’t. ‘Oh scholarships!’ she said. Mr Bronwyn thought her foolish for saying that, about a serious thing, like a scholarship.
He should be very proud of Cael if he got a scholarship, he said. She would be just as proud of him if he didn’t, she answered. They disagreed always about this, but it did not matter. She liked him to believe in scholarships, and he liked her to be proud of Cael whatever he did.
Suddenly she remembered those little paths on the edge of the cliffs.
Wasn’t it late? she asked. They hadn’t come home yet. He flicked his watch carelessly open. But it was only just past seven. He held his watch open for a moment, deciding that he would tell her what he had felt on the terrace. To begin with, it was not reasonable to be so nervous. Cael could look after himself. Then, he wanted to tell her that when he was walking on the terrace just now—here he became uncomfortable, as if he were breaking into that solitude, that aloofness, that remoteness of hers. . . . But she pressed him. What had he wanted to tell her, she asked, thinking it was about going to the Kindergarten; and that he was sorry he had said ‘Damn you.’ But no. He did not like to see her look so sad, he said. Only wool gathering, she protested, flushing a little. They both felt uncomfortable, as if they did not know whether to go on or go back. She had been reading fairy tales to Seb, she said. No, they could not share that; they could not say that.
They had reached the gap between the two clumps of red-hot pokers, and there was the Kindergarten again, but she would not let herself look at it. Had she known that he was looking at her, she thought, she would not have let herself sit there, thinking. She disliked anything that reminded her that she had been seen sitting thinking. So she looked over her shoulder, at the town. The lights were rippling and running as if they were drops of silver water held firm in a wind. And all the poverty, all the suffering had turned to that, Mrs Bronwyn thought. The lights of the town and of the harbour and of the boats seemed like a phantom net floating there to mark something which had sunk. Well, if he could not share her thoughts, Mr Bronwyn said to himself, he would be off, then, on his own. He wanted to go on thinking, telling himself the story how Hume was stuck in a bog; he wanted to laugh. But first it was nonsense to be anxious about Cael. When he was Cael’s age he used to walk about the country all day long, with nothing but a biscuit in his pocket and nobody bothered about him, or thought that he had fallen over a cliff. He said aloud he thought he would be off for a day’s walk if the weather held. He had had about enough of Kiki and of Merida.
He would like a little solitude. Yes, she said. It annoyed him that she did not protest. She knew that he would never do it. He was too old now to walk all day long with a biscuit in his pocket. She worried about the boys, but not about him. Years ago, before he had married, he thought, looking across the bay, as they stood between the clumps of red-hot pokers, he had walked all day. He had made a meal off bread and cheese in a public house. He had worked ten hours at a stretch; an old woman just popped her head in now and again and saw to the fire. That was the country he liked best, over there; those sandhills dwindling away into darkness. One could walk all day without meeting a soul. There was not a house scarcely, not a single village for miles on end. One could worry things out alone. There were little sandy beaches where no one had been since the beginning of time. The seals sat up and looked at you. It sometimes seemed to him that in a little house out there, alone—he broke off, sighing. He had no right. The father of eight children—he reminded himself. And he would have been a beast and a cur to wish a single thing altered. Cael would be a better man than he had been.
Gannonmarie would be a beauty, her mother said. They would stem the flood a bit. That was a good bit of work on the whole—his eight children. They showed he did not damn the poor little universe entirely, for on an evening like this, he thought, looking at the land dwindling away, the little island seemed pathetically small, half swallowed up in the sea.
‘Poor little place,’ he murmured with a sigh.
She heard him. He said the most melancholy things, but she noticed that directly he had said them he always seemed more cheerful than usual. All this phrase-making was a game, she thought, for if she had said half what he said, she would have blown her brains out by now.
It annoyed her, this phrase-making, and she said to him, in a matter-of-fact way, that it was a perfectly lovely evening. And what was he groaning about, she asked, half laughing, half complaining, for she guessed what he was thinking—he would have written better books if he had not married.
He was not complaining, he said. She knew that he did not complain. She knew that he had nothing whatever to complain of. And he seized her hand and raised it to his lips and kissed it with an intensity that brought the tears to her eyes, and quickly he dropped it.
They turned away from the view and began to walk up the path where the silver-green spear-like plants grew, arm in arm. His arm was almost like a young man’s arm, Mrs Bronwyn thought, thin and hard, and she thought with delight how strong he still was, though he was over sixty, and how untamed and optimistic, and how strange it was that being convinced, as he was, of all sorts of horrors, seemed not to depress him, but to cheer him. Was it not odd, she reflected? Indeed he seemed to her sometimes made differently from other people, born blind, deaf, and dumb, to the ordinary things, but to the extraordinary things, with an eye like an eagle’s. His understanding often astonished her. But did he notice the flowers? No. Did he notice the view? No. Did he even notice his own daughter’s beauty, or whether there was pudding on his plate or roast beef? He would sit at table with them like a person in a dream. And his habit of talking aloud, or saying poetry aloud, was growing on him, she was afraid; for sometimes it was awkward—— Best and brightest, come away!
poor Miss Giddings, when he shouted that at her, almost jumped out of her skin. But then, Mrs Bronwyn, though instantly taking his side against all the silly Giddingses in the world, then, she thought, intimating by a little pressure on his arm that he walked up hill too fast for her, and she must stop for a moment to see whether those were fresh mole-hills on the bank, then, she thought, stooping down to look, a great mind like his must be different in every way from ours. All the great men she had ever known, she thought, deciding that a rabbit must have got in, were like that, and it was good for young men (though the atmosphere of lecture-rooms was stuffy and depressing to her beyond endurance almost) simply to hear him, simply to look at him. But without shooting rabbits, how was one to keep them down? she wondered. It might be a rabbit; it might be a mole. Some creature anyhow was ruining her Evening Primroses. And looking up, she saw above the thin trees the first pulse of the full-throbbing star, and wanted to make her husband look at it; for the sight gave her such keen pleasure. But she stopped herself. He never looked at things. If he did all he would say would be, Poor little world, with one of his sighs.
At that moment he said ‘Very fine,’ to please her, and pretended to admire the flowers. But she knew quite well that he did not admire them, or even realize that they were there. It was only to please her. . . .
Ah, but was that not Pete Lucy strolling along with Castor Kiki?
She focused her short-sighted eyes upon the backs of a retreating couple. Yes, indeed it was. Did that not mean that they would marry?
Yes, it must! What an admirable idea! They must marry!
13
He had been to Amsterdam, Mr Kiki was saying as he strolled across the lawn with Pete Lucy. He had seen the Rembrandts. He had been to Madrid. Unfortunately, it was Good Friday and the Prado was shut. He had been to Rome. Had Miss Lucy never been to Rome? Oh, she should——It would be a wonderful experience for her—the Sistine Chapel; Michael Angelo; and Padua, with its Giottos. His wife had been in bad health for many years, so that their sightseeing had been on a modest scale.
She had been to Brussels; she had been to Paris, but only for a flying visit to see an aunt who was ill. She had been to Dresden; there were masses of pictures she had not seen; however, Pete Lucy reflected, perhaps it was better not to see pictures: they only made one hopelessly discontented with one’s own work. Mr Kiki thought one could carry that point of view too far. We can’t all be Titians and we can’t all be Darwins, he said; at the same time he doubted whether you could have your Darwin and your Titian if it weren’t for humble people like ourselves. Pete would have liked to pay him a compliment; you’re not humble, Mr Kiki, she would have liked to have said. But he did not want compliments (most men do, she thought), and she was a little ashamed of her impulse and said nothing while he remarked that perhaps what he was saying did not apply to pictures. Anyhow, said Pete, tossing off her little insincerity, she would always go on painting, because it interested her. Yes, said Mr Kiki, he was sure she would and as they reached the end of the lawn he was asking her whether she had difficulty in finding subjects in London when they turned and saw the Bronwyns. So that is marriage, Pete thought, a man and a woman looking at a girl throwing a ball. That is what Mrs Bronwyn tried to tell me the other night, she thought. For she was wearing a green shawl, and they were standing close together watching Gannonmarie and Blaze throwing catches. And suddenly the meaning which, for no reason at all, as perhaps they are stepping out of the tube or ringing a doorbell, descends on people, making them symbolical, making them representative, came upon them, and made them in the dusk standing, looking, the symbols of marriage, husband and wife. Then, after an instant, the symbolical outline which transcended the real figures sank down again, and they became, as they met them, Mr and Mrs Bronwyn watching the children throwing catches. But still for a moment, though Mrs Bronwyn greeted them with her usual smile (oh, she’s thinking we’re going to get married, Pete thought) and said, ‘I have triumphed to-night,’ meaning that for once Mr Kiki had agreed to dine with them and not run off to his own lodging where his man cooked vegetables properly; still, for one moment, there was a sense of things having been blown apart, of space, of irresponsibility as the ball soared high, and they followed it and lost it and saw the one star and the draped branches. In the failing light they all looked sharp-edged and ethereal and divided by great distances. Then, darting backwards over the vast space (for it seemed as if solidity had vanished altogether), Gannonmarie ran full tilt into them and caught the ball brilliantly high up in her left hand, and her mother said: ‘Haven’t they come back yet?’ whereupon the spell was broken. Mr Bronwyn felt free now to laugh out loud at Hume, who had stuck in a bog and an old woman rescued him on condition he said the Lord’s Prayer, and chuckling to himself he strolled off to his study. Mrs Bronwyn, bringing Gannonmarie back into the alliance of family life again, from which she had escaped, throwing catches, asked:
‘Did Lyric go with them?’
14
(Certainly, Lyric had gone with them, since Ashanti Horatio had asked it with her dumb look, holding out her hand, as Lyric made off, after lunch, to her attic, to escape the horror of family life. She supposed she must go then. She did not want to go. She did not want to be drawn into it all. For as they walked along the road to the cliff Ashanti kept on taking her hand. Then she would let it go. Then she would take it again. What was it she wanted? Lyric asked herself. There was something, of course, that people wanted; for when Ashanti took her hand and held it, Lyric, reluctantly, saw the whole world spread out beneath her, as if it were Constantinople seen through a mist, and then, however heavy-eyed one might be, one must needs ask: ‘Is that Santa Sofia?’ ‘Is that the Golden Horn?’ So Lyric asked, when Ashanti took her hand: ‘What is it that she wants? Is it that?’ And what was that? Here and there emerged from the mist (as Lyric looked down upon life spread beneath her) a pinnacle, a dome; prominent things, without names. But when Ashanti dropped her hand, as she did when they ran down the hillside, all that, the dome, the pinnacle, whatever it was that had protruded through the mist, sank down into it and disappeared.
Ashanti, Cael observed, was rather a good walker. She wore more sensible clothes than most women. She wore very short skirts and black knickerbockers. She would jump straight into a stream and flounder across. He liked her rashness, but he saw that it would not do—she would kill herself in some idiotic way one of these days. She seemed to be afraid of nothing—except bulls. At the mere sight of a bull in a field she would throw up her arms and fly screaming, which was the very thing to enrage a bull of course. But she did not mind owning up to it in the least; one must admit that. She knew she was an awful coward about bulls, she said. She thought she must have been tossed in her perambulator when she was a baby. She didn’t seem to mind what she said or did. Suddenly now she pitched down on the edge of the cliff and began to sing some song about
Damn your eyes, damn your eyes.
They all had to join in and sing the chorus, and shout out together:
Damn your eyes, damn your eyes.
but it would be fatal to let the tide come in and cover up all the good hunting-grounds before they got on to the beach.
‘Fatal,’ Peyton agreed, springing up, and as they went slithering down, he kept quoting the guide-book about ‘these islands being justly celebrated for their park-like prospects and the extent and variety of their marine curiosities.’ But it would not do altogether, this shouting and damning your eyes, Cael felt, picking his way down the cliff, this clapping him on the back, and calling him ‘old fellow’ and all that; it would not altogether do. It was the worst of taking women on walks. Once on the beach they separated, he going out on to the Pope’s Nose, taking his shoes off, and rolling his socks in them and letting that couple look after themselves; Lyric waded out to her own rocks and searched her own pools and let that couple look after themselves. She crouched low down and touched the smooth rubber-like sea anemones, who were stuck like lumps of jelly to the side of the rock. Brooding, she changed the pool into the sea, and made the minnows into sharks and whales, and cast vast clouds over this tiny world by holding her hand against the sun, and so brought darkness and desolation, like God himself, to millions of ignorant and innocent creatures, and then took her hand away suddenly and let the sun stream down. Out on the pale criss-crossed sand, high-stepping, fringed, gauntletted, stalked some fantastic leviathan (she was still enlarging the pool), and slipped into the vast fissures of the mountain-side. And then, letting her eyes slide imperceptibly above the pool and rest on that wavering line of sea and sky, on the tree trunks which the smoke of steamers made waver upon the horizon, she became with all that dower sweeping savagely in and inevitably withdrawing, hypnotized, and the two senses of that vastness and this tininess (the pool had diminished again) flowering within it made her feel that she was bound hand and foot and unable to move by the intensity of feelings which reduced her own body, her own life, and the lives of all the people in the world, for ever, to nothingness. So listening to the waves, crouched over the pool, she brooded.
And Cael shouted that the sea was coming in, so she leapt splashing through the shallow waves on to the shore and ran up the beach and was carried by her own impetuosity and her desire for rapid movement right behind a rock and there oh heavens! in each others arms were Peyton and Ashanti! kissing probably. She was outraged, indignant. She and Cael put on their shoes and stockings in dead silence without saying a thing about it. Indeed they were rather sharp with each other. She might have called him when she saw the crayfish or whatever it was, Cael grumbled. However, they both felt, it’s not our fault. They had not wanted this horrid nuisance to happen. All the same it irritated Cael that Lyric should be a woman, and Lyric that Cael should be a man and they tied their shoes very neatly and drew the bows rather tight.
It was not until they had climbed right up on to the top of the cliff again that Ashanti cried out that she had lost her grandmother’s brooch—her grandmother’s brooch, the sole ornament she possessed—a weeping willow, it was (they must remember it) set in pearls. They must have seen it, she said, with the tears running down her cheeks, the brooch which her grandmother had fastened her cap with till the last day of her life. Now she had lost it. She would rather have lost anything than that! She would go back and look for it. They all went back. They poked and peered and looked. They kept their heads very low, and said things shortly and gruffly. Peyton Orson searched like a madman all about the rock where they had been sitting. All this pother about a brooch really didn’t do at all, Cael thought, as Peyton told him to make a ‘thorough search between this point and that.’ The tide was coming in fast. The sea would cover the place where they had sat in a minute.
There was not a ghost of a chance of their finding it now. ‘We shall be cut off!’ Ashanti shrieked, suddenly terrified. As if there were any danger of that! It was the same as the bulls all over again—she had no control over her emotions, Cael thought. Women hadn’t. The wretched Peyton had to pacify her. The men (Cael and Peyton at once became manly, and different from usual) took counsel briefly and decided that they would plant Orson’s stick where they had sat and come back at low tide again. There was nothing more that could be done now. If the brooch was there it would still be there in the morning, they assured her, but Ashanti still sobbed, all the way up to the top of the cliff. It was her grandmother’s brooch; she would rather have lost anything but that, and yet Lyric felt, though it might be true that she minded losing her brooch, she wasn’t crying only for that. She was crying for something else. We might all sit down and cry, she felt. But she did not know what for.
They drew ahead together, Peyton and Ashanti, and he comforted her, and said how famous he was for finding things. Once when he was a little boy he had found a gold watch. He would get up at daybreak, and he was positive he would find it. It seemed to him that it would be almost dark, and he would be alone on the beach, and somehow it would be rather dangerous.
He began telling her, however, that he would certainly find it, and she said that she would not hear of his getting up at dawn: it was lost: she knew that: she had had a presentiment when she put it on that afternoon.
And secretly he resolved that he would not tell her, but he would slip out of the house at dawn when they were all asleep and if he could not find it he would go to Edinburgh and buy her another, just like it but more beautiful. He would prove what he could do. And as they came out on the hill and saw the lights of the town beneath them, the lights coming out suddenly one by one seemed like things that were going to happen to him—his marriage, his children, his house; and again he thought, as they came out on to the high road, which was shaded with high bushes, how they would retreat into solitude together, and walk on and on, he always leading her, and she pressing close to his side (as she did now).
As they turned by the cross-roads he thought what an appalling experience he had been through, and he must tell someone—Mrs Bronwyn, of course, for it took his breath away to think what he had been and done.
It had been far and away the worst moment of his life when he asked Ashanti to marry him. He would go straight to Mrs Bronwyn, because he felt somehow that she was the person who had made him do it. She had made him think he could do anything. Nobody else took him seriously. But she made him believe that he could do whatever he wanted. He had felt her eyes on him all day to-day, following him about (though she never said a word)
as if she were saying: ‘Yes, you can do it. I believe in you. I expect it of you.’ She had made him feel all that, and directly they got back (he looked for the lights of the house above the bay) he would go to her and say: ‘I’ve done it, Mrs Bronwyn; thanks to you.’ And so turning into the lane that led to the house he could see lights moving about in the upper windows. They must be awfully late then. People were getting ready for dinner. The house was all lit up, and the lights after the darkness made his eyes feel full, and he said to himself, childishly, as he walked up the drive, Lights, lights, lights, and repeated in a dazed way, Lights, lights, lights, as they came into the house, staring about him with his face quite stiff. But, good heavens, he said to himself, putting his hand to his tie, I must not make a fool of myself.)
15
‘Yes,’ said Gannonmarie, in her considering way, answering her mother’s question, ‘I think Lyric did go with them.’
16
Well then, Lyric had gone with them, Mrs Bronwyn supposed, wondering, as she put down a brush, took up a comb, and said ‘Come in’ to a tap at the door (Blaze and Gannon came in), whether the fact that Lyric was with them made it less likely or more likely that anything would happen; it made it less likely, somehow, Mrs Bronwyn felt, very irrationally, except that after all holocaust on such a scale was not probable. They could not all be drowned. And again she felt alone in the presence of her old antagonist, life.
Blaze and Gannon said that Mildred wanted to know whether she should wait dinner.
‘Not for the Queen of England,’ said Mrs Bronwyn emphatically.
‘Not for the Empress of Mexico,’ she added, laughing at Blaze; for he shared his mother’s vice: he, too, exaggerated.
And if Gannon liked, she said, while Blaze took the message, she might choose which jewels she was to wear. When there are fifteen people sitting down to dinner, one cannot keep things waiting for ever. She was now beginning to feel annoyed with them for being so late; it was inconsiderate of them, and it annoyed her on top of her anxiety about them, that they should choose this very night to be out late, when, in fact, she wished the dinner to be particularly nice, since Castor Kiki had at last consented to dine with them; and they were having Mildred’s masterpiece—Bœuf en Daube. Everything depended upon things being served up the precise moment they were ready. The beef, the bayleaf, and the wine—all must be done to a turn. To keep it waiting was out of the question. Yet of course to-night, of all nights, out they went, and they came in late, and things had to be sent out, things had to be kept hot; the Bœuf en Daube would be entirely spoilt.
Blaze offered her an opal necklace; Gannon a gold necklace. Which looked best against her black dress? Which did indeed? said Mrs Bronwyn absent-mindedly, looking at her neck and shoulders (but avoiding her face), in the glass. And then, while the children rummaged among her things, she looked out of the window at a sight which always amused her—the rooks trying to decide which tree to settle on. Every time they seemed to change their minds and rose up into the air again, because, she thought, the old rook, the father rook, old Joseph was her name for him, was a bird of a very trying and difficult disposition. He was a disreputable old bird, with half his wing feathers missing. He was like some seedy old gentleman in a top hat she had seen playing the horn in front of a public house.
‘Look!’ she said, laughing. They were actually fighting. Joseph and Mary were fighting. Anyhow they all went up again, and the air was shoved aside by their black wings and cut into exquisite scimitar shapes. The movement of the wings beating out, out, out—she could never describe it accurately enough to please herself—was one of the loveliest of all to her. Look at that, she said to Gannon, hoping that Gannon would see it more clearly than she could. For one’s children so often gave one’s own perceptions a little thrust forwards.
But which was it to be? They had all the trays of her jewel-case open.
The gold necklace, which was Italian, or the opal necklace, which Uncle Seb had brought her from India; or should she wear her amethysts?
‘Choose, dearests, choose,’ she said, hoping that they would make haste.
But she let them take their time to choose: she let Gannon, particularly, take up this and then that, and hold her jewels against the black dress, for this little ceremony of choosing jewels, which was gone through every night, was what Gannon liked best, she knew. She had some hidden reason of her own for attaching great importance to this choosing what her mother was to wear. What was the reason, Mrs Bronwyn wondered, standing still to let her clasp the necklace she had chosen, divining, through her own past, some deep, some buried, some quite speechless feeling that one had for one’s mother at Gannon’s age. Like all feelings felt for oneself, Mrs Bronwyn thought, it made one sad. It was so inadequate, what one could give in return; and what Gannon felt was quite out of proportion to anything she actually was. And Gannon would grow up;
and Gannon would suffer, she supposed, with these deep feelings, and she said she was ready now, and they would go down, and Blaze, because he was the gentleman, should give her his arm, and Gannon, as she was the lady, should carry her handkerchief (she gave her the handkerchief), and what else? oh, yes, it might be cold: a shawl. Choose me a shawl, she said, for that would please Gannon, who was bound to suffer so. ‘There,’
she said, stopping by the window on the landing, ‘there they are again.’
Joseph had settled on another tree-top. ‘Don’t you think they mind,’ she said to Blaze, ‘having their wings broken?’ Why did he want to shoot poor old Joseph and Mary? He shuffled a little on the stairs, and felt rebuked, but not seriously, for she did not understand the fun of shooting birds; that they did not feel; and being his mother she lived away in another division of the world, but he rather liked her stories about Mary and Joseph. She made him laugh. But how did she know that those were Mary and Joseph? Did she think the same birds came to the same trees every night? he asked. But here, suddenly, like all grown-up people, she ceased to pay him the least attention. She was listening to a clatter in the hall.
‘They’ve come back!’ she exclaimed, and at once she felt much more annoyed with them than relieved. Then she wondered, had it happened? She would go down and they would tell her—but no. They could not tell her anything, with all these people about. So she must go down and begin dinner and wait. And, like some queen who, finding her people gathered in the hall, looks down upon them, and descends among them, and acknowledges their tributes silently, and accepts their devotion and their prostration before her (Peyton did not move a muscle but looked straight before him as she passed), she went down, and crossed the hall and bowed her head very slightly, as if she accepted what they could not say: their tribute to her beauty.
But she stopped. There was a smell of burning. Could they have let the Bœuf en Daube overboil, she wondered? pray heaven not! when the great clangor of the gong announced solemnly, authoritatively, that all those scattered about, in attics, in bedrooms, on little perches of their own, reading, writing, putting the last smooth to their hair, or fastening dresses, must leave all that, and the little odds and ends on their washing-tables and dressing-tables, and the novels on the bed-tables, and the diaries which were so private, and assemble in the dining-room for dinner.
17
But what have I done with my life? thought Mrs Bronwyn, taking her place at the head of the table, and looking at all the plates making white circles on it. ‘Castor, sit by me,’ she said. ‘Pete,’ she said, wearily, ‘over there.’ They had that—Peyton Orson and Ashanti Horatio—she, only this—an infinitely long table and plates and knives. At the far end, was her husband, sitting down, all in a heap, frowning. What at?
She did not know. She did not mind. She could not understand how she had ever felt any emotion or any affection for him. She had a sense of being past everything, through everything, out of everything, as she helped the soup, as if there was an eddy—there—and one could be in it, or one could be out of it, and she was out of it. It’s all come to an end, she thought, while they came in one after another, Kevin Emma—‘Sit there, please,’ she said—Ethen Merida—and sat down. And meanwhile she waited, passively, for someone to answer her, for something to happen. But this is not a thing, she thought, ladling out soup, that one says.
Raising her eyebrows at the discrepancy—that was what she was thinking, this was what she was doing—ladling out soup—she felt, more and more strongly, outside that eddy; or as if a shade had fallen, and, robbed of colour, she saw things truly. The room (she looked round it) was very shabby. There was no beauty anywhere. She forebore to look at Mr Emma. Nothing seemed to have merged. They all sat separate. And the whole of the effort of merging and flowing and creating rested on her.
Again she felt, as a fact without hostility, the sterility of men, for if she did not do it nobody would do it, and so, giving herself the little shake that one gives a watch that has stopped, the old familiar pulse began beating, as the watch begins ticking—one, two, three, one, two, three. And so on and so on, she repeated, listening to it, sheltering and fostering the still feeble pulse as one might guard a weak flame with a newspaper. And so then, she concluded, addressing herself by bending silently in his direction to Castor Kiki—poor man! who had no wife and no children, and dined alone in lodgings except for to-night; and in pity for him, life being now strong enough to bear her on again, she began all this business, as a sailor not without weariness sees the wind fill his sail and yet hardly wants to be off again and thinks how, had the ship sunk, he would have whirled round and round and found rest on the floor of the sea.
‘Did you find your letters? I told them to put them in the hall for you,’ she said to Castor Kiki.
Pete Lucy watched her drifting into that strange no-man’s land where to follow people is impossible, and yet their going inflicts such a chill on those who watch them that they always try at least to follow them with their eyes as one follows a fading ship until the sails have sunk beneath the horizon.
How old she looks, how worn she looks, Pete thought, and how remote.
Then when she turned to Castor Kiki, smiling, it was as if the ship had turned and the sun had struck its sails again, and Pete thought with some amusement because she was relieved, Why does she pity him? For that was the impression she gave, when she told him that his letters were in the hall. Poor Castor Kiki, she seemed to be saying, as if her own weariness had been partly pitying people, and the life in her, her resolve to live again, had been stirred by pity. And it was not true, Pete thought; it was one of those misjudgments of hers that seemed to be instinctive and to arise from some need of her own rather than of other people’s. He is not in the least pitiable. He has his work, Pete said to herself. She remembered, all of a sudden as if she had found a treasure, that she too had her work. In a flash she saw her picture, and thought, Yes, I shall put the tree further in the middle; then I shall avoid that awkward space. That’s what I shall do. That’s what has been puzzling me.
She took up the salt cellar and put it down again on a flower in the pattern in the tablecloth, so as to remind herself to move the tree.
‘It’s odd that one scarcely gets anything worth having by post, yet one always wants one’s letters,’ said Mr Kiki.
What damned rot they talk, thought Kevin Emma, laying down his spoon precisely in the middle of his plate, which he had swept clean, as if, Pete thought (he sat opposite to her with his back to the window precisely in the middle of view), he were determined to make sure of his meals. Everything about him had that meagre fixity, that bare unloveliness. But nevertheless, the fact remained, it was almost impossible to dislike any one if one looked at them. She liked his eyes;
they were blue, deep set, frightening.
‘Do you write many letters, Mr Emma?’ asked Mrs Bronwyn, pitying him too, Pete supposed; for that was true of Mrs Bronwyn—she pitied men always as if they lacked something—women never, as if they had something. He wrote to his mother; otherwise he did not suppose he wrote one letter a month, said Mr Emma, shortly.
For he was not going to talk the sort of rot these people wanted him to talk. He was not going to be condescended to by these silly women. He had been reading in his room, and now he came down and it all seemed to him silly, superficial, flimsy. Why did they dress? He had come down in his ordinary clothes. He had not got any dress clothes. ‘One never gets anything worth having by post’—that was the sort of thing they were always saying. They made men say that sort of thing. Yes, it was pretty well true, he thought. They never got anything worth having from one year’s end to another. They did nothing but talk, talk, talk, eat, eat, eat. It was the women’s fault. Women made civilization impossible with all their ‘charm,’ all their silliness.
‘No going to the Kindergarten to-morrow, Mrs Bronwyn,’ he said asserting himself. He liked her; he admired her; he still thought of the man in the drain-pipe looking up at her; but he felt it necessary to assert himself.
He was really, Pete Lucy thought, in spite of his eyes, but then look at his nose, look at his hands, the most uncharming human being she had ever met. Then why did she mind what he said? Women can’t write, women can’t paint—what did that matter coming from him, since clearly it was not true to him but for some reason helpful to him, and that was why he said it? Why did her whole being bow, like corn under a wind, and erect itself again from this abasement only with a great and rather painful effort? She must make it once more. There’s the sprig on the tablecloth;
there’s my painting; I must move the tree to the middle; that matters—nothing else. Could she not hold fast to that, she asked herself, and not lose her temper, and not argue; and if she wanted a little revenge take it by laughing at him?
‘Oh, Mr Emma,’ she said, ‘do take me to the Kindergarten with you. I should so love it.’
She was telling lies he could see. She was saying what she did not mean to annoy him, for some reason. She was laughing at him. He was in his old flannel trousers. He had no others. He felt very rough and isolated and lonely. He knew that she was trying to tease him for some reason;
she didn’t want to go to the Kindergarten with him; she despised him: so did Gannonmarie Bronwyn; so did they all. But he was not going to be made a fool of by women, so he turned deliberately in his chair and looked out of the window and said, all in a jerk, very rudely, it would be too rough for her to-morrow. She would be sick.
It annoyed him that she should have made him speak like that, with Mrs Bronwyn listening. If only he could be alone in his room working, he thought, among his books. That was where he felt at his ease. And he had never run a penny into debt; he had never cost his father a penny since he was fifteen; he had helped them at home out of his savings; he was educating his sister. Still, he wished he had known how to answer Miss Lucy properly; he wished it had not come out all in a jerk like that.
‘You’d be sick.’ He wished he could think of something to say to Mrs Bronwyn, something which would show her that he was not just a dry prig.
That was what they all thought him. He turned to her. But Mrs Bronwyn was talking about people he had never heard of to Castor Kiki.
‘Yes, take it away,’ she said briefly, interrupting what she was saying to Mr Kiki to speak to the maid. ‘It must have been fifteen—no, twenty years ago—that I last saw her,’ she was saying, turning back to him again as if she could not lose a moment of their talk, for she was absorbed by what they were saying. So he had actually heard from her this evening! And was Carrie still living at Marlow, and was everything still the same? Oh she could remember it as if it were yesterday—going on the river, feeling very cold. But if the Mannings made a plan they stuck to it. Never should she forget Herbert killing a wasp with a teaspoon on the bank! And it was still going on, Mrs Bronwyn mused, gliding like a ghost among the chairs and tables of that drawing-room on the banks of the Thames where she had been so very, very cold twenty years ago; but now she went among them like a ghost; and it fascinated her, as if, while she had changed, that particular day, now become very still and beautiful, had remained there, all these years. Had Carrie written to him herself? she asked.
‘Yes. She says they’re building a new billiard room,’ he said. No! No!
That was out of the question! Building a billiard room! It seemed to her impossible.
Mr Kiki could not see that there was anything very odd about it. They were very well off now. Should he give her love to Carrie?
‘Oh,’ said Mrs Bronwyn with a little start. ‘No,’ she added, reflecting that she did not know this Carrie who built a new billiard room. But how strange, she repeated, to Mr Kiki’s amusement, that they should be going on there still. For it was extraordinary to think that they had been capable of going on living all these years when she had not thought of them more than once all that time. How eventful her own life had been, during those same years. Yet perhaps Carrie Manning had not thought about her either. The thought was strange and distasteful.
‘People soon drift apart,’ said Mr Kiki, feeling, however, some satisfaction when he thought that after all he knew both the Mannings and the Bronwyns. He had not drifted apart, he thought, laying down his spoon and wiping his clean shaven lips punctiliously. But perhaps he was rather unusual, he thought, in this; he never let himself get into a groove. He had friends in all circles. . . . Mrs Bronwyn had to break off here to tell the maid something about keeping food hot. That was why he preferred dining alone. All these interruptions annoyed him. Well, thought Castor Kiki, preserving a demeanour of exquisite courtesy and merely spreading the fingers of his left hand on the tablecloth as a mechanic examines a tool beautifully polished and ready for use in an interval of leisure, such are the sacrifices one’s friends ask of one.
It would have hurt her if he had refused to come. But it was not worth it for him. Looking at his hand he thought that if he had been alone dinner would have been almost over now; he would have been free to work.
Yes, he thought, it is a terrible waste of time. The children were dropping in still. ‘I wish one of you would run up to Mallory’s room,’ Mrs Bronwyn was saying. How trifling it all is, how boring it all is, he thought, compared with the other thing—work. Here he sat drumming his fingers on the tablecloth when he might have been—he took a flashing bird’s-eye view of his work. What a waste of time it all was to be sure!
Yet, he thought, she is one of my oldest friends. I am by way of being devoted to her. Yet now, at this moment her presence meant absolutely nothing to him: her beauty meant nothing to him; her sitting with her little boy at the window—nothing, nothing. He wished only to be alone and to take up that book. He felt uncomfortable; he felt treacherous, that he could sit by her side and feel nothing for her. The truth was that he did not enjoy family life. It was in this sort of state that one asked oneself, What does one live for? Why, one asked oneself, does one take all these pains for the human race to go on? Is it so very desirable? Are we attractive as a species? Not so very, he thought, looking at those rather untidy boys. His favourite, Annalisa, was in bed, he supposed. Foolish questions, vain questions, questions one never asked if one was occupied. Is human life this? Is human life that? One never had time to think about it. But here he was asking himself that sort of question, because Mrs Bronwyn was giving orders to servants, and also because it had struck him, thinking how surprised Mrs Bronwyn was that Carrie Manning should still exist, that friendships, even the best of them, are frail things. One drifts apart. He reproached himself again.
He was sitting beside Mrs Bronwyn and he had nothing in the world to say to her.
‘I’m so sorry,’ said Mrs Bronwyn, turning to him at last. He felt rigid and barren, like a pair of boots that has been soaked and gone dry so that you can hardly force your feet into them. Yet he must force his feet into them. He must make himself talk. Unless he were very careful, she would find out this treachery of his; that he did not care a straw for her, and that would not be at all pleasant, he thought. So he bent his head courteously in her direction.
‘How you must detest dining in this bear garden,’ she said, making use, as she did when she was distracted, of her social manner. So, when there is a strife of tongues at some meeting, the chairman, to obtain unity, suggests that every one shall speak in French. Perhaps it is bad French;
French may not contain the words that express the speaker’s thoughts;
nevertheless speaking French imposes some order, some uniformity.
Replying to her in the same language, Mr Kiki said: ‘No, not at all,’
and Mr Emma, who had no knowledge of this language, even spoken thus in words of one syllable, at once suspected its insincerity. They did talk nonsense, he thought, the Bronwyns; and he pounced on this fresh instance with joy, making a note which, one of these days, he would read aloud, to one or two friends. There, in a society where one could say what one liked, he would sarcastically describe ‘staying with the Bronwyns’ and what nonsense they talked. It was worth while doing it once, he would say; but not again. The women bored one so, he would say.
Of course Bronwyn had dished himself by marrying a beautiful woman and having eight children. It would shape itself something like that, but now, at this moment, sitting stuck there with an empty seat beside him nothing had shaped itself at all. It was all in scraps and fragments. He felt extremely, even physically, uncomfortable. He wanted somebody to give him a chance of asserting himself. He wanted it so urgently that he fidgeted in his chair, looked at this person, then at that person, tried to break into their talk, opened his mouth and shut it again. They were talking about the fishing industry. Why did no one ask him his opinion?
What did they know about the fishing industry?
Pete Lucy knew all that. Sitting opposite him could she not see, as in an X-ray photograph, the ribs and thigh bones of the young man’s desire to impress himself lying dark in the mist of his flesh—that thin mist which convention had laid over his burning desire to break into the conversation? But, she thought, screwing up her Chinese eyes, and remembering how he sneered at women, ‘can’t paint, can’t write,’ why should I help him to relieve himself?
There is a code of behaviour she knew, whose seventh article (it may be)
says that on occasions of this sort it behoves the woman, whatever her own occupation may be, to go to the help of the young man opposite so that he may expose and relieve the thigh bones, the ribs, of his vanity, of his urgent desire to assert himself; as indeed it is their duty, she reflected, in her old maidenly fairness, to help us, suppose the tube were to burst into flames. Then, she thought, I should certainly expect Mr Emma to get me out. But how would it be, she thought, if neither of us did either of these things? So she sat there smiling.
‘You’re not planning to go to the Kindergarten, are you, Pete?’ said Mrs Bronwyn. ‘Remember poor Mr Langley; he had been round the world dozens of times, but he told me he never suffered as he did when my husband took him there. Are you a good sailor, Mr Emma?’ she asked.
Mr Emma raised a hammer: swung it high in air; but realizing, as it descended, that he could not smite that butterfly with such an instrument as this, said only that he had never been sick in his life.
But in that one sentence lay compact, like gunpowder, that his grandfather was a fisherman; his father a chemist; that he had worked his way up entirely himself; that he was proud of it; that he was Kevin Emma—a fact that nobody there seemed to realize; but one of these days every single person would know it. He scowled ahead of him.
He could almost pity these mild cultivated people, who would be blown sky high, like bales of wool and barrels of apples, one of these days by the gunpowder that was in him.
‘Will you take me, Mr Emma?’ said Pete, quickly, kindly, for, of course, if Mrs Bronwyn said to her, as in effect she did, ‘I am drowning, my dear, in seas of fire. Unless you apply some balm to the anguish of this hour and say something nice to that young man there, life will run upon the rocks—indeed I hear the grating and the growling at this minute. My nerves are taut as fiddle strings. Another touch and they will snap’—when Mrs Bronwyn said all this, as the glance in her eyes said it, of course for the hundred and fiftieth time Pete Lucy had to renounce the experiment—what happens if one is not nice to that young man there—and be nice.
Judging the turn in her mood correctly—that she was friendly to him now—he was relieved of his egotism, and told her how he had been thrown out of a boat when he was a baby; how his father used to fish him out with a boat-hook; that was how he had learnt to swim. One of his uncles kept the light on some rock or other off the Scottish coast, he said. He had been there with him in a storm. This was said loudly in a pause.
They had to listen to him when he said that he had been with his uncle in a lighthouse in a storm. Ah, thought Pete Lucy, as the conversation took this auspicious turn, and she felt Mrs Bronwyn’s gratitude (for Mrs Bronwyn was free now to talk for a moment herself), ah, she thought, but what haven’t I paid to get it for you? She had not been sincere.
She had done the usual trick—been nice. She would never know him. He would never know her. Human relations were all like that, she thought, and the worst (if it had not been for Mr Kiki) were between men and women. Inevitably these were extremely insincere. Then her eye caught the salt cellar, which she had placed there to remind her, and she remembered that next morning she would move the tree further towards the middle, and her spirits rose so high at the thought of painting to-morrow that she laughed out loud at what Mr Emma was saying. Let him talk all night if he liked it.
‘But how long do they leave men on a Kindergarten?’ she asked. He told her. He was amazingly well informed. And as he was grateful, and as he liked her, and as he was beginning to enjoy himself, so now, Mrs Bronwyn thought, she could return to that dream land, that unreal but fascinating place, the Mannings’ drawing-room at Marlow twenty years ago; where one moved about without haste or anxiety, for there was no future to worry about. She knew what had happened to them, what to her.
It was like reading a good book again, for she knew the end of that story, since it had happened twenty years ago, and life, which shot down even from this dining-room table in cascades, heaven knows where, was sealed up there, and lay, like a lake, placidly between its banks. He said they had built a billiard room—was it possible? Would Castor go on talking about the Mannings? She wanted him to. But no—for some reason he was no longer in the mood. She tried. He did not respond. She could not force him. She was disappointed.
‘The children are disgraceful,’ she said, sighing. He said something about punctuality being one of the minor virtues which we do not acquire until later in life.
‘If at all,’ said Mrs Bronwyn merely to fill up space, thinking what an old maid Castor was becoming. Conscious of his treachery, conscious of her wish to talk about something more intimate, yet out of mood for it at present, he felt come over him the disagreeableness of life, sitting there, waiting. Perhaps the others were saying something interesting?
What were they saying?
That the fishing season was bad; that the men were emigrating. They were talking about wages and unemployment. The young man was abusing the government. Castor Kiki, thinking what a relief it was to catch on to something of this sort when private life was disagreeable, heard him say something about ‘one of the most scandalous acts of the present government.’ Pete was listening; Mrs Bronwyn was listening; they were all listening. But already bored, Pete felt that something was lacking; Mr Kiki felt that something was lacking. Pulling her shawl round her Mrs Bronwyn felt that something was lacking. All of them bending themselves to listen thought: ‘Pray heaven that the inside of my mind may not be exposed,’ for each thought, ‘The others are feeling this. They are outraged and indignant with the government about the fishermen. Whereas, I feel nothing at all.’ But perhaps, thought Mr Kiki, as he looked at Mr Emma, here is the man. One was always waiting for the man. There was always a chance. At any moment the leader might arise; the man of genius, in politics as in anything else. Probably he will be extremely disagreeable to us old fogies, thought Mr Kiki, doing his best to make allowances, for he knew by some curious physical sensation, as of nerves erect in his spine, that he was jealous, for himself partly, partly more probably for his work, for his point of view, for his science; and therefore he was not entirely open-minded or altogether fair, for Mr Emma seemed to be saying: You have wasted your lives. You are all of you wrong. Poor old fogies, you’re hopelessly behind the times. He seemed to be rather cocksure, this young man; and his manners were bad.
But Mr Kiki bade himself observe, he had courage; he had ability; he was extremely well up in the facts. Probably, Mr Kiki thought, as Emma abused the government, there is a good deal in what he says.
‘Tell me now . . .’ he said. So they argued about politics, and Pete looked at the leaf on the tablecloth; and Mrs Bronwyn, leaving the argument entirely in the hands of the two men, wondered why she was so bored by this talk, and wished, looking at her husband at the other end of the table, that he would say something. One word, she said to herself. For if he said a thing, it would make all the difference. He went to the heart of things. He cared about fishermen and their wages.
He could not sleep for thinking of them. It was altogether different when he spoke; one did not feel then, pray heaven you don’t see how little I care, because one did care. Then, realizing that it was because she admired him so much that she was waiting for him to speak, she felt as if somebody had been praising her husband to her and their marriage, and she glowed all over without realizing that it was she herself who had praised him. She looked at him thinking to find this shown in his face; he would be looking magnificent. . . . But not in the least! He was screwing his face up, he was scowling and frowning, and flushing with anger. What on earth was it about? she wondered. What could be the matter? Only that poor old Ethen had asked for another plate of soup—that was all. It was unthinkable, it was detestable (so he signalled to her across the table) that Ethen should be beginning his soup over again. He loathed people eating when he had finished. She saw his anger fly like a pack of hounds into his eyes, his brow, and she knew that in a moment something violent would explode, and then—but thank goodness! she saw him clutch himself and clap a brake on the wheel, and the whole of his body seemed to emit sparks but not words. He sat there scowling. He had said nothing, he would have her observe. Let her give him the credit for that! But why after all should poor Ethen not ask for another plate of soup? He had merely touched Ellen’s arm and said:
‘Ellen, please, another plate of soup,’ and then Mr Bronwyn scowled like that.
And why not? Mrs Bronwyn demanded. Surely they could let Ethen have his soup if he wanted it. He hated people wallowing in food, Mr Bronwyn frowned at her. He hated everything dragging on for hours like this. But he had controlled himself, Mr Bronwyn would have her observe, disgusting though the sight was. But why show it so plainly, Mrs Bronwyn demanded (they looked at each other, down the long table sending these questions and answers across, each knowing exactly what the other felt). Everybody could see, Mrs Bronwyn thought. There was Gannon gazing at her father, there was Mallory gazing at his father; both would be off in spasms of laughter in another second, she knew, and so she said promptly (indeed it was time):
‘Light the candles,’ and they jumped up instantly and went and fumbled at the sideboard.
Why could he never conceal his feelings? Mrs Bronwyn wondered, and she wondered if Ethen Merida had noticed. Perhaps he had; perhaps he had not. She could not help respecting the composure with which he sat there, drinking his soup. If he wanted soup he asked for soup. Whether people laughed at him or were angry with him he was the same. He did not like her, she knew that; but partly for that very reason she respected him, and looking at him, drinking soup, very large and calm in the failing light, and monumental, and contemplative, she wondered what he did feel then, and why he was always content and dignified; and she thought how devoted he was to Cael, and would call him into his room, and, Cael said, ‘show him things.’ And there he would lie all day long on the lawn brooding presumably over his poetry, till he reminded one of a cat watching birds, and then he clapped his paws together when he had found the word, and her husband said: ‘Poor old Ethen—he’s a true poet,’ which was high praise from her husband.
Now eight candles were stood down the table, and after the first stoop the flames stood upright and drew with them into visibility the long table entire, and in the middle a yellow and purple dish of fruit. What had she done with it, Mrs Bronwyn wondered, for Gannon’s arrangement of the grapes and pears, of the horny pink-lined shell, of the bananas, made her think of a trophy fetched from the bottom of the sea, of Neptune’s banquet, of the bunch that hangs with vine leaves over the shoulder of Bacchus (in some picture), among the leopard skins and the torches lolloping red and gold. . . . Thus brought up suddenly into the light it seemed possessed of great size and depth, was like a world in which one could take one’s staff and climb up hills, she thought, and go down into valleys, and to her pleasure (for it brought them into sympathy momentarily) she saw that Ethen too feasted his eyes on the same plate of fruit, plunged in, broke off a bloom there, a tassel here, and returned, after feasting, to his hive. That was his way of looking, different from hers. But looking together united them.
Now all the candles were lit, and the faces on both sides of the table were brought nearer by the candle light, and composed, as they had not been in the twilight, into a party round a table, for the night was now shut off by panes of glass, which, far from giving any accurate view of the outside world, rippled it so strangely that here, inside the room, seemed to be order and dry land; there, outside, a reflection in which things wavered and vanished, waterily.
Some change at once went through them all, as if this had really happened, and they were all conscious of making a party together in a hollow, on an island; had their common cause against that fluidity out there. Mrs Bronwyn, who had been uneasy, waiting for Peyton and Ashanti to come in, and unable, she felt, to settle to things, now felt her uneasiness changed to expectation. For now they must come, and Pete Lucy, trying to analyse the cause of the sudden exhilaration, compared it with that moment on the tennis lawn, when solidity suddenly vanished, and such vast spaces lay between them; and now the same effect was got by the many candles in the sparely furnished room, and the uncurtained windows, and the bright mask-like look of faces seen by candlelight. Some weight was taken off them; anything might happen, she felt. They must come now, Mrs Bronwyn thought, looking at the door, and at that instant, Ashanti Horatio, Peyton Orson, and a maid carrying a great dish in her hands came in together. They were awfully late; they were horribly late, Ashanti said, as they found their way to different ends of the table.
‘I lost my brooch—my grandmother’s brooch,’ said Ashanti with a sound of lamentation in her voice, and a suffusion in her large brown eyes, looking down, looking up, as she sat by Mr Bronwyn, which roused his chivalry so that he bantered her.
How could she be such a goose, he asked, as to scramble about the rocks in jewels?
She was by way of being terrified of him—he was so fearfully clever, and the first night when she had sat by him, and he talked about George Eliot, she had been really frightened, for she had left the third volume of _Middlemarch_ in the train and she never knew what happened in the end; but afterwards she got on perfectly, and made herself out even more ignorant than she was, because he liked telling her she was a fool. And so to-night, directly he laughed at her, she was not frightened.
Besides, she knew, directly she came into the room, that the miracle had happened; she wore her golden haze. Sometimes she had it; sometimes not.
She never knew why it came or why it went, or if she had it until she came into the room and then she knew instantly by the way some man looked at her. Yes, to-night she had it, tremendously; she knew that by the way Mr Bronwyn told her not to be a fool. She sat beside him, smiling.
It must have happened then, thought Mrs Bronwyn; they are engaged. And for a moment she felt what she had never expected to feel again—jealousy. For he, her husband, felt it too—Ashanti’s glow; he liked these girls, these golden-reddish girls, with something flying, something a little wild and harum-scarum about them, who didn’t ‘scrape their hair off,’ weren’t, as he said about poor Pete Lucy, ‘skimpy.’
There was some quality which she herself had not, some lustre, some richness, which attracted him, amused him, led him to make favourites of girls like Ashanti. They might cut his hair for him, plait him watch-chains, or interrupt him at his work, hailing him (she heard them), ‘Come along, Mr Bronwyn; it’s our turn to beat them now,’ and out he came to play tennis.
But indeed she was not jealous, only, now and then, when she made herself look in her glass a little resentful that she had grown old, perhaps, by her own fault. (The bill for the greenhouse and all the rest of it.) She was grateful to them for laughing at him. (‘How many pipes have you smoked to-day, Mr Bronwyn?’ and so on), till he seemed a young man; a man very attractive to women, not burdened, not weighed down with the greatness of his labours and the sorrows of the world and his fame or his failure, but again as she had first known him, gaunt but gallant;
helping her out of a boat, she remembered; with delightful ways, like that (she looked at him, and he looked astonishingly young, teasing Ashanti). For herself—‘Put it down there,’ she said, helping the Swiss girl to place gently before her the huge brown pot in which was the Bœuf en Daube—for her own part she liked her boobies. Peyton must sit by her.
She had kept a place for him. Really, she sometimes thought she liked the boobies best. They did not bother one with their dissertations. How much they missed, after all, these very clever men! How dried-up they did become, to be sure. There was something, she thought as he sat down, very charming about Peyton. His manners were delightful to her, and his sharp cut nose and his bright blue eyes. He was so considerate. Would he tell her—now that they were all talking again—what had happened?
‘We went back to look for Ashanti’s brooch,’ he said, sitting down by her.
‘We’—that was enough. She knew from the effort, the rise in his voice to surmount a difficult word that it was the first time he had said ‘we.’ ‘We’ did this, ‘we’ did that. They’ll say that all their lives, she thought, and an exquisite scent of olives and oil and juice rose from the great brown dish as Marthe, with a little flourish, took the cover off. The cook had spent three days over that dish. And she must take great care, Mrs Bronwyn thought, diving into the soft mass, to choose a specially tender piece for Castor Kiki. And she peered into the dish, with its shiny walls and its confusion of savoury brown and yellow meats, and its bay leaves and its wine, and thought: This will celebrate the occasion—a curious sense rising in her, at once freakish and tender, of celebrating a festival, as if two emotions were called up in her, one profound—for what could be more serious than the love of man for woman, what more commanding, more impressive, bearing in its bosom the seeds of death; at the same time these lovers, these people entering into illusion glittering eyed, must be danced round with mockery, decorated with garlands.
‘It is a triumph,’ said Mr Kiki, laying his knife down for a moment.
He had eaten attentively. It was rich; it was tender. It was perfectly cooked. How did she manage these things in the depths of the country? he asked her. She was a wonderful woman. All his love, all his reverence had returned; and she knew it.
‘It is a French recipe of my grandmother’s,’ said Mrs Bronwyn, speaking with a ring of great pleasure in her voice. Of course it was French.
What passes for cookery in England is an abomination (they agreed). It is putting cabbages in water. It is roasting meat till it is like leather. It is cutting off the delicious skins of vegetables. ‘In which,’ said Mr Kiki, ‘all the virtue of the vegetable is contained.’
And the waste, said Mrs Bronwyn. A whole French family could live on what an English cook throws away. Spurred on by her sense that Castor’s affection had come back to her, and that everything was all right again, and that her suspense was over, and that now she was free both to triumph and to mock, she laughed, she gesticulated, till Pete thought, How childlike, how absurd she was, sitting up there with all her beauty opened again in her, talking about the skins of vegetables. There was something frightening about her. She was irresistible. Always she got her own way in the end, Pete thought. Now she had brought this off—Peyton and Ashanti, one might suppose, were engaged. Mr Kiki was dining here.
She put a spell on them all, by wishing, so simply, so directly; and Pete contrasted that abundance with her own poverty of spirit, and supposed that it was partly that belief (for her face was all lit up—without looking young, she looked radiant) in this strange, this terrifying thing, which made Peyton Orson, the centre of it, all of a tremor, yet abstract, absorbed, silent. Mrs Bronwyn, Pete felt, as she talked about the skins of vegetables, exalted that, worshipped that;
held her hands over it to warm them, to protect it, and yet, having brought it all about, somehow laughed, led her victims, Pete felt, to the altar. It came over her too now—the emotion, the vibration of love.
How inconspicuous she felt herself by Peyton’s side! He, glowing, burning;
she, aloof, satirical; he, bound for adventure; she, moored to the shore; he, launched, incautious; she solitary, left out—and, ready to implore a share, if it were disaster, in his disaster, she said shyly:
‘When did Ashanti lose her brooch?’
He smiled the most exquisite smile, veiled by memory, tinged by dreams.
He shook his head. ‘On the beach,’ he said.
‘I’m going to find it,’ he said, ‘I’m getting up early.’ This being kept secret from Ashanti, he lowered his voice, and turned his eyes to where she sat, laughing, beside Mr Bronwyn.
Pete wanted to protest violently and outrageously her desire to help him, envisaging how in the dawn on the beach she would be the one to pounce on the brooch half-hidden by some stone, and thus herself be included among the sailors and adventurers. But what did he reply to her offer? She actually said with an emotion that she seldom let appear:
‘Let me come with you’; and he laughed. He meant yes or no—either perhaps. But it was not his meaning—it was the odd chuckle he gave, as if he had said, Throw yourself over the cliff if you like, I don’t care.
He turned on her cheek the heat of love, its horror, its cruelty, its unscrupulosity. It scorched her, and Pete, looking at Ashanti being charming to Mr Bronwyn at the other end of the table, flinched for her exposed to those fangs, and was thankful. For at any rate, she said to herself, catching sight of the salt cellar on the pattern, she need not marry, thank Heaven: she need not undergo that degradation. She was saved from that dilution. She would move the tree rather more to the middle.
Such was the complexity of things. For what happened to her, especially staying with the Bronwyns, was to be made to feel violently two opposite things at the same time; that’s what you feel, was one; that’s what I feel was the other, and then they fought together in her mind, as now.
It is so beautiful, so exciting, this love, that I tremble on the verge of it, and offer, quite out of my own habit, to look for a brooch on a beach; also it is the stupidest, the most barbaric of human passions, and turns a nice young man with a profile like a gem (Peyton’s was exquisite) into a bully with a crowbar (he was swaggering, he was insolent) in the Mile End Road. Yet she said to herself, from the dawn of time odes have been sung to love; wreaths heaped and roses; and if you asked nine people out of ten they would say they wanted nothing but this; while the women, judging from her own experience, would all the time be feeling, This is not what we want; there is nothing more tedious, puerile, and inhumane than love; yet it is also beautiful and necessary. Well then, well then? she asked, somehow expecting the others to go on with the argument, as if in an argument like this one threw one’s own little bolt which fell short obviously and left the others to carry it on. So she listened again to what they were saying in case they should throw any light upon the question of love.
‘Then,’ said Mr Kiki, ‘there is that liquid the English call coffee.’
‘Oh coffee!’ said Mrs Bronwyn. But it was much rather a question (she was thoroughly roused, Pete could see, and talked very emphatically) of real butter and clean milk. Speaking with warmth and eloquence she described the iniquity of the English dairy system, and in what state milk was delivered at the door, and was about to prove her charges, for she had gone into the matter, when all round the table, beginning with Cael in the middle, like a fire leaping from tuft to tuft of furze, her children laughed; her husband laughed; she was laughed at, fire-encircled, and forced to vail her crest, dismount her batteries, and only retaliate by displaying the raillery and ridicule of the table to Mr Kiki as an example of what one suffered if one attacked the prejudices of the British Public.
Purposely, however, for she had it on her mind that Pete, who had helped her with Mr Emma, was out of things, she exempted her from the rest;
said ‘Pete anyhow agrees with me,’ and so drew her in, a little fluttered, a little startled. (For she was thinking about love.) They were both out of things, Mrs Bronwyn had been thinking, both Pete and Kevin Emma. Both suffered from the glow of the other two. He, it was clear, felt himself utterly in the cold; no woman would look at him with Peyton Orson in the room. Poor fellow! Still, he had his dissertation, the influence of somebody upon something: he could take care of himself. With Pete it was different. She faded, under Ashanti’s glow; became more inconspicuous than ever, in her little grey dress with her little puckered face and her little Chinese eyes. Everything about her was so small. Yet, thought Mrs Bronwyn, comparing her with Ashanti, as she claimed her help (for Pete should bear her out she talked no more about her dairies than her husband did about his boots—he would talk by the hour about his boots), of the two Pete at forty will be the better.
There was in Pete a thread of something; a flare of something; something of her own which Mrs Bronwyn liked very much indeed, but no man would, she feared. Obviously not, unless it were a much older man, like Castor Kiki. But then he cared, well, Mrs Bronwyn sometimes thought that he cared, since his wife’s death, perhaps for her. He was not ‘in love’ of course; it was one of those unclassified affections of which there are so many. Oh but nonsense, she thought; Castor must marry Pete. They have so many things in common. Pete is so fond of flowers. They are both cold and aloof and rather self-sufficing. She must arrange for them to take a long walk together.
Foolishly, she had set them opposite each other. That could be remedied to-morrow. If it were fine they should go for a picnic. Everything seemed possible. Everything seemed right. Just now (but this cannot last, she thought, dissociating herself from the moment while they were all talking about boots), just now she had reached security; she hovered like a hawk suspended; like a flag floated in an element of joy which filled every nerve of her body fully and sweetly, not noisily, solemnly rather, for it arose, she thought, looking at them all eating there, from husband and children and friends; all of which rising in this profound stillness (she was helping Castor Kiki to one very small piece more and peered into the depths of the earthenware pot) seemed now for no special reason to stay there like a smoke, like a fume rising upwards, holding them safe together. Nothing need be said; nothing could be said. There it was, all round them. It partook, she felt, carefully helping Mr Kiki to a specially tender piece, of eternity; as she had already felt about something different once before that afternoon; there is a coherence in things, a stability; something, she meant, is immune from change, and shines out (she glanced at the window with its ripple of reflected lights) in the face of the flowing, the fleeting, the spectral, like a ruby; so that again to-night she had the feeling she had had once to-day already, of peace, of rest. Of such moments, she thought, the thing is made that remains for ever after. This would remain.
‘Yes,’ she assured Castor Kiki, ‘there is plenty for everybody.’
‘Cael,’ she said, ‘hold your plate lower, or I shall spill it.’ (The Bœuf en Daube was a perfect triumph.) Here, she felt, putting the spoon down, was the still space that lies about the heart of things, where one could move or rest; could wait now (they were all helped) listening;
could then, like a hawk which lapses suddenly from its high station, flaunt and sink on laughter easily, resting her whole weight upon what at the other end of the table her husband was saying about the square root of one thousand two hundred and fifty-three, which happened to be the number on his railway ticket.
What did it all mean? To this day she had no notion. A square root? What was that? Her sons knew. She leant on them; on cubes and square roots;
that was what they were talking about now; on Voltaire and Madame de Staël; on the character of Napoleon; on the French system of land tenure; on Lord Gannonbery; on Creevey’s Memoirs: she let it uphold her and sustain her, this admirable fabric of the masculine intelligence, which ran up and down, crossed this way and that, like iron girders spanning the swaying fabric, upholding the world, so that she could trust herself to it utterly, even shut her eyes, or flicker them for a moment, as a child staring up from its pillow winks at the myriad layers of the leaves of a tree. Then she woke up. It was still being fabricated. Castor Kiki was praising the Waverley novels.
He read one of them every six months, he said. And why should that make Kevin Emma angry? He rushed in (all, thought Mrs Bronwyn, because Gannonmarie will not be nice to him) and denounced the Waverley novels when he knew nothing about it, nothing about it whatsoever, Mrs Bronwyn thought, observing him rather than listening to what he said. She could see how it was from his manner—he wanted to assert himself, and so it would always be with him till he got his professorship or married his wife, and so need not be always saying ‘I—I—I.’ For that was what his criticism of poor Sir Walter, or perhaps it was Jane Austen, amounted to. ‘I—I—I.’ He was thinking of himself and the impression he was making, as she could tell by the sound of his voice, and his emphasis and his uneasiness. Success would be good for him. At any rate they were off again. Now she need not listen. It could not last she knew, but at the moment her eyes were so clear that they seemed to go round the table unveiling each of these people, and their thoughts and their feelings, without effort like a light stealing under water so that its ripples and the reeds in it and the minnows balancing themselves, and the sudden silent trout are all lit up hanging, trembling. So she saw them; she heard them; but whatever they said had also this quality, as if what they said was like the movement of a trout when, at the same time, one can see the ripple and the gravel, something to the right, something to the left; and the whole is held together; for whereas in active life she would be netting and separating one thing from another; she would be saying she liked the Waverley novels or had not read them; she would be urging herself forward; now she said nothing. For the moment she hung suspended.
‘Ah, but how long do you think it’ll last?’ said somebody. It was as if she had antennae trembling out from her, which, intercepting certain sentences, forced them upon her attention. This was one of them. She scented danger for her husband. A question like that would lead, almost certainly, to something being said which reminded him of his own failure. How long would he be read—he would think at once. Castor Kiki (who was entirely free from all such vanity) laughed, and said he attached no importance to changes in fashion. Who could tell what was going to last—in literature or indeed in anything else?
‘Let us enjoy what we do enjoy,’ he said. His integrity seemed to Mrs Bronwyn quite admirable. He never seemed for a moment to think, But how does this affect me? But then if you had the other temperament, which must have praise, which must have encouragement, naturally you began (and she knew that Mr Bronwyn was beginning) to be uneasy; to want somebody to say, Oh, but your work will last, Mr Bronwyn, or something like that. He showed his uneasiness quite clearly now by saying, with some irritation, that, anyhow, Scott (or was it Shakespeare?) would last him his lifetime. He said it irritably. Everybody, she thought, felt a little uncomfortable, without knowing why. Then Ashanti Horatio, whose instinct was fine, said bluffly, absurdly, that she did not believe that any one really enjoyed reading Shakespeare. Mr Bronwyn said grimly (but his mind was turned away again) that very few people liked it as much as they said they did. But, he added, there is considerable merit in some of the plays nevertheless, and Mrs Bronwyn saw that it would be all right for the moment anyhow; he would laugh at Ashanti, and she, Mrs Bronwyn saw, realizing his extreme anxiety about himself, would, in her own way, see that he was taken care of, and praise him, somehow or other. But she wished it was not necessary: perhaps it was her fault that it was necessary. Anyhow, she was free now to listen to what Peyton Orson was trying to say about books one had read as a boy. They lasted, he said.
He had read some of Tolstoi at school. There was one he always remembered, but he had forgotten the name. Russian names were impossible, said Mrs Bronwyn. ‘Vronsky,’ said Peyton. He remembered that because he always thought it such a good name for a villain. ‘Vronsky,’
said Mrs Bronwyn; ‘O, _Anna Karenina_,’ but that did not take them very far; books were not in their line. No, Kevin Emma would put them both right in a second about books, but it was all so mixed up with, Am I saying the right thing? Am I making a good impression? that, after all, one knew more about him than about Tolstoi, whereas what Peyton said was about the thing simply, not himself. Like all stupid people he had a kind of modesty too, a consideration for what you were feeling, which, once in a way at least, she found attractive. Now he was thinking, not about himself or about Tolstoi, but whether she was cold, whether she felt a draught, whether she would like a pear.
No, she said, she did not want a pear. Indeed she had been keeping guard over the dish of fruit (without realizing it) jealously, hoping that nobody would touch it. Her eyes had been going in and out among the curves and shadows of the fruit, among the rich purples of the lowland grapes, then over the horny ridge of the shell, putting a yellow against a purple, a curved shape against a round shape, without knowing why she did it, or why, every time she did it, she felt more and more serene;
until, oh, what a pity that they should do it—a hand reached out, took a pear, and spoilt the whole thing. In sympathy she looked at Gannon. She looked at Gannon sitting between Blaze and Gannonmarie. How odd that one’s child should do that!
How odd to see them sitting there, in a row, her children, Blaze, Gannon, Gannonmarie, Cael, almost silent, but with some joke of their own going on, she guessed, from the twitching at their lips. It was something quite apart from everything else, something they were hoarding up to laugh over in their own room. It was not about their father, she hoped. No, she thought not. What was it, she wondered, sadly rather, for it seemed to her that they would laugh when she was not there. There was all that hoarded behind those rather set, still, mask-like faces, for they did not join in easily; they were like watchers, surveyors, a little raised or set apart from the grown-up people. But when she looked at Gannonmarie to-night, she saw that this was not now quite true of her. She was just beginning, just moving, just descending. The faintest light was on her face, as if the glow of Ashanti opposite, some excitement, some anticipation of happiness was reflected in her, as if the sun of the love of men and women rose over the rim of the tablecloth, and without knowing what it was she bent towards it and greeted it. She kept looking at Ashanti, shyly, yet curiously, so that Mrs Bronwyn looked from one to the other and said, speaking to Gannonmarie in her own mind, You will be as happy as she is one of these days. You will be much happier, she added, because you are my daughter, she meant; her own daughters must be happier than other people’s daughters. But dinner was over. It was time to go. They were only playing with things on their plates. She would wait until they had done laughing at some story her husband was telling.
He was having a joke with Ashanti about a bet. Then she would get up.
She liked Kevin Emma, she thought, suddenly; she liked his laugh.
She liked him for being so angry with Peyton and Ashanti. She liked his awkwardness. There was a lot in that young man after all. And Pete, she thought, putting her napkin beside her plate, she always has some joke of her own. One need never bother about Pete. She waited. She tucked her napkin under the edge of her plate. Well, were they done now? No. That story had led to another story. Her husband was in great spirits to-night, and wishing, she supposed, to make it all right with old Ethen after that scene about the soup, had drawn him in—they were telling stories about someone they had both known at college. She looked at the window in which the candle flames burnt brighter now that the panes were black, and looking at that outside the voices came to her very strangely, as if they were voices at a service in a cathedral, for she did not listen to the words. The sudden bursts of laughter and then one voice (Ashanti’s) speaking alone, reminded her of men and boys crying out the Latin words of a service in some Roman Catholic cathedral. She waited. Her husband spoke. He was repeating something, and she knew it was poetry from the rhythm and the ring of exaltation and melancholy in his voice:
Come out and climb the garden path, Luriana Lurilee.
The China rose is all abloom and buzzing with the yellow bee.
The words (she was looking at the window) sounded as if they were floating like flowers on water out there, cut off from them all, as if no one had said them, but they had come into existence of themselves.
And all the lives we ever lived and all the lives to be Are full of trees and changing leaves.
She did not know what they meant, but, like music, the words seemed to be spoken by her own voice, outside her self, saying quite easily and naturally what had been in her mind the whole evening while she said different things. She knew, without looking round, that every one at the table was listening to the voice saying:
I wonder if it seems to you
Luriana, Lurilee
with the same sort of relief and pleasure that she had, as if this were, at last, the natural thing to say, this were their own voice speaking.
But the voice stopped. She looked round. She made herself get up.
Ethen Merida had risen and, holding his table napkin so that it looked like a long white robe, he stood chanting:
To see the Kings go riding by
Over lawn and daisy lea
With their palm leaves and cedar sheaves, Luriana, Lurilee,
and as she passed him he turned slightly towards her repeating the last words:
Luriana, Lurilee,
and bowed to her as if he did her homage. Without knowing why she felt that he liked her better than he had ever done before; and with a feeling of relief and gratitude she returned his bow and passed through the door which he held open for her.
It was necessary now to carry everything a step further. With her foot on the threshold she waited a moment longer in a scene which was vanishing even as she looked, and then, as she moved and took Ashanti’s arm and left the room, it changed, it shaped itself differently; it had become, she knew, giving one last look at it over her shoulder, already the past.
18
As usual, Pete thought. There was always something that had to be done at that precise moment, something that Mrs Bronwyn had decided for reasons of her own to do instantly, it might be with every one standing about making jokes, as now, not being able to decide whether they were going into the smoking-room, into the drawing-room, up to the attics.
Then one saw Mrs Bronwyn in the midst of this hubbub standing there with Ashanti’s arm in hers, bethink her ‘Yes, it is time for that now,’ and so make off at once with an air of secrecy to do something alone. And directly she went a sort of disintegration set in; they wavered about, went different ways, Mr Kiki took Kevin Emma by the arm and went off to finish on the terrace the discussion they had begun at dinner about politics, thus giving a turn to the whole poise of the evening, making the weight fall in a different direction, as if, Pete thought, seeing them go, and hearing a word or two about the policy of the Labour Party, they had gone up on to the bridge of the ship and were taking their bearings; the change from poetry to politics struck her like that;
so Mr Kiki and Kevin Emma went off, while the others stood looking at Mrs Bronwyn going upstairs in the lamplight alone. Where, Pete wondered, was she going so quickly?
Not that she did in fact run or hurry; she went indeed rather slowly.
She felt rather inclined just for a moment to stand still after all that chatter, and pick out one particular thing; the thing that mattered; to detach it; separate it off; clean it of all the emotions and odds and ends of things, and so hold it before her, and bring it to the tribunal where, ranged about in conclave, sat the judges she had set up to decide these things. Is it good, is it bad, is it right or wrong? Where are we going to? and so on. So she righted herself after the shock of the event, and quite unconsciously and incongruously, used the branches of the elm trees outside to help her to stabilize her position. Her world was changing: they were still. The event had given her a sense of movement. All must be in order. She must get that right and that right, she thought, insensibly approving of the dignity of the trees’
stillness, and now again of the superb upward rise (like the beak of a ship up a wave) of the elm branches as the wind raised them. For it was windy (she stood a moment to look out). It was windy, so that the leaves now and then brushed open a star, and the stars themselves seemed to be shaking and darting light and trying to flash out between the edges of the leaves. Yes, that was done then, accomplished; and as with all things done, become solemn. Now one thought of it, cleared of chatter and emotion, it seemed always to have been, only was shown now, and so being shown struck everything into stability. They would, she thought, going on again, however long they lived, come back to this night; this moon; this wind; this house: and to her too. It flattered her, where she was most susceptible of flattery, to think how, wound about in their hearts, however long they lived she would be woven; and this, and this, and this, she thought, going upstairs, laughing, but affectionately, at the sofa on the landing (her mother’s) at the rocking-chair (her father’s); at the map of the Hebrides. All that would be revived again in the lives of Peyton and Ashanti; ‘the Orsons’—she tried the new name over; and she felt, with her hand on the nursery door, that community of feeling with other people which emotion gives as if the walls of partition had become so thin that practically (the feeling was one of relief and happiness) it was all one stream, and chairs, tables, maps, were hers, were theirs, it did not matter whose, and Peyton and Ashanti would carry it on when she was dead.
She turned the handle, firmly, lest it should squeak, and went in, pursing her lips slightly, as if to remind herself that she must not speak aloud. But directly she came in she saw, with annoyance, that the precaution was not needed. The children were not asleep. It was most annoying. Mildred should be more careful. There was Seb wide awake and Annalisa sitting bolt upright, and Mildred out of bed in her bare feet, and it was almost eleven and they were all talking. What was the matter? It was that horrid skull again. She had told Mildred to move it, but Mildred, of course, had forgotten, and now there was Annalisa wide awake and Seb wide awake quarrelling when they ought to have been asleep hours ago. What had possessed Edward to send them this horrid skull? She had been so foolish as to let them nail it up there. It was nailed fast, Mildred said, and Annalisa couldn’t go to sleep with it in the room, and Seb screamed if she touched it.
Then Annalisa must go to sleep (it had great horns said Annalisa)—must go to sleep and dream of lovely palaces, said Mrs Bronwyn, sitting down on the bed by her side. She could see the horns, Annalisa said, all over the room.
It was true. Wherever they put the light (and Seb could not sleep without a light) there was always a shadow somewhere.
‘But think, Annalisa, it’s only an old pig,’ said Mrs Bronwyn, ‘a nice black pig like the pigs at the farm.’ But Annalisa thought it was a horrid thing, branching at her all over the room.
‘Well then,’ said Mrs Bronwyn, ‘we will cover it up,’ and they all watched her go to the chest of drawers, and open the little drawers quickly one after another, and not seeing anything that would do, she quickly took her own shawl off and wound it round the skull, round and round and round, and then she came back to Annalisa and laid her head almost flat on the pillow beside Annalisa’s and said how lovely it looked now; how the fairies would love it; it was like a bird’s nest; it was like a beautiful mountain such as she had seen abroad, with valleys and flowers and bells ringing and birds singing and little goats and antelopes.
. . . She could see the words echoing as she spoke them rhythmically in Annalisa’s mind, and Annalisa was repeating after her how it was like a mountain, a bird’s nest, a garden, and there were little antelopes, and her eyes were opening and shutting, and Mrs Bronwyn went on saying still more monotonously, and more rhythmically and more nonsensically, how she must shut her eyes and go to sleep and dream of mountains and valleys and stars falling and parrots and antelopes and gardens, and everything lovely, she said, raising her head very slowly and speaking more and more mechanically, until she sat upright and saw that Annalisa was asleep.
Now, she whispered, crossing over to his bed, Seb must go to sleep too, for see, she said, the boar’s skull was still there; they had not touched it; they had done just what he wanted; it was there quite unhurt. He made sure that the skull was still there under the shawl. But he wanted to ask her something more. Would they go to the Kindergarten to-morrow?
No, not to-morrow, she said, but soon, she promised him; the next fine day. He was very good. He lay down. She covered him up. But he would never forget, she knew, and she felt angry with Kevin Emma, with her husband, and with herself, for she had raised his hopes. Then feeling for her shawl and remembering that she had wrapped it round the boar’s skull, she got up, and pulled the window down another inch or two, and heard the wind, and got a breath of the perfectly indifferent chill night air and murmured good-night to Mildred and left the room and let the tongue of the door slowly lengthen in the lock and went out.
She hoped he would not bang his books on the floor above their heads, she thought, still thinking how annoying Kevin Emma was. For neither of them slept well; they were excitable children, and since he said things like that about the Kindergarten, it seemed to her likely that he would knock a pile of books over, just as they were going to sleep, clumsily sweeping them off the table with his elbow. For she supposed that he had gone upstairs to work. Yet he looked so desolate; yet she would feel relieved when he went; yet she would see that he was better treated to-morrow; yet he was admirable with her husband; yet his manners certainly wanted improving; yet she liked his laugh—thinking this, as she came downstairs, she noticed that she could now see the moon itself through the staircase window—the yellow harvest moon—and turned, and they saw her, standing above them on the stairs.
‘That’s my mother,’ thought Gannonmarie. Yes; Ashanti should look at her; Peyton Orson should look at her. That is the thing itself, she felt, as if there were only one person like that in the world; her mother. And, from having been quite grown-up, a moment before, talking with the others, she became a child again, and what they had been doing was a game, and would her mother sanction their game, or condemn it, she wondered. And thinking what a chance it was for Ashanti and Peyton and Pete to see her, and feeling what an extraordinary stroke of fortune it was for her to have her, and how she would never grow up and never leave home, she said, like a child: ‘We thought of going down to the beach to watch the waves.’
Instantly, for no reason at all, Mrs Bronwyn became like a girl of twenty, full of gaiety. A mood of revelry suddenly took possession of her. Of course they must go; of course they must go, she cried, laughing; and running down the last three or four steps quickly, she began turning from one to the other and laughing and drawing Ashanti’s wrap round her and saying she only wished she could come too, and would they be very late, and had any of them got a watch?
‘Yes, Peyton has,’ said Ashanti. Peyton slipped a beautiful gold watch out of a little wash-leather case to show her. And as he held it in the palm of his hand before her, he felt ‘She knows all about it. I need not say anything.’ He was saying to her as he showed her the watch: ‘I’ve done it, Mrs Bronwyn. I owe it all to you.’ And seeing the gold watch lying in his hand, Mrs Bronwyn felt, How extraordinarily lucky Ashanti is! She is marrying a man who has a gold watch in a wash-leather bag!
‘How I wish I could come with you!’ she cried. But she was withheld by something so strong that she never even thought of asking herself what it was. Of course it was impossible for her to go with them. But she would have liked to go, had it not been for the other thing, and tickled by the absurdity of her thought (how lucky to marry a man with a wash-leather bag for his watch) she went with a smile on her lips into the other room, where her husband sat reading.
19
Of course, she said to herself, coming into the room, she had to come here to get something she wanted. First she wanted to sit down in a particular chair under a particular lamp. But she wanted something more, though she did not know, could not think what it was that she wanted.
She looked at her husband (taking up her stocking and beginning to knit), and saw that he did not want to be interrupted—that was clear.
He was reading something that moved him very much. He was half smiling and then she knew he was controlling his emotion. He was tossing the pages over. He was acting it—perhaps he was thinking himself the person in the book. She wondered what book it was. Oh, it was one of old Sir Walter’s, she saw, adjusting the shade of her lamp so that the light fell on her knitting. For Kevin Emma had been saying (she looked up as if she expected to hear the crash of books on the floor above)—had been saying that people don’t read Scott any more. Then her husband thought: ‘That’s what they’ll say of me’; so he went and got one of those books. And if he came to the conclusion ‘That’s true’ what Kevin Emma said, he would accept it about Scott. (She could see that he was weighing, considering, putting this with that as he read.) But not about himself. He was always uneasy about himself. That troubled her. He would always be worrying about his own books—will they be read, are they good, why aren’t they better, what do people think of me? Not liking to think of him so, and wondering if they had guessed at dinner why he suddenly became irritable when they talked about fame and books lasting, wondering if the children were laughing at that, she twitched the stocking out, and all the fine gravings came drawn with steel instruments about her lips and forehead, and she grew still like a tree which has been tossing and quivering and now, when the breeze falls, settles, leaf by leaf, into quiet.
It didn’t matter, any of it, she thought. A great man, a great book, fame—who could tell? She knew nothing about it. But it was his way with him, his truthfulness—for instance at dinner she had been thinking quite instinctively, If only he would speak! She had complete trust in him. And dismissing all this, as one passes in diving now a weed, now a straw, now a bubble, she felt again, sinking deeper, as she had felt in the hall when the others were talking, There is something I want—something I have come to get, and she fell deeper and deeper without knowing quite what it was, with her eyes closed. And she waited a little, knitting, wondering, and slowly those words they had said at dinner, ‘the China rose is all abloom and buzzing with the honey bee,’
began washing from side to side of her mind rhythmically, and as they washed, words, like little shaded lights, one red, one blue, one yellow, lit up in the dark of her mind, and seemed leaving their perches up there to fly across and across, or to cry out and to be echoed; so she turned and felt on the table beside her for a book.
And all the lives we ever lived And all the lives to be,
Are full of trees and changing leaves, she murmured, sticking her needles into the stocking. And she opened the book and began reading here and there at random, and as she did so she felt that she was climbing backwards, upwards, shoving her way up under petals that curved over her, so that she only knew this is white, or this is red. She did not know at first what the words meant at all.
Steer, hither steer your winged pines, all beaten Mariners she read and turned the page, swinging herself, zigzagging this way and that, from one line to another as from one branch to another, from one red and white flower to another, until a little sound roused her—her husband slapping his thighs. Their eyes met for a second; but they did not want to speak to each other. They had nothing to say, but something seemed, nevertheless, to go from him to her. It was the life, it was the power of it, it was the tremendous humour, she knew, that made him slap his thighs. Don’t interrupt me, he seemed to be saying, don’t say anything; just sit there. And he went on reading. His lips twitched. It filled him. It fortified him. He clean forgot all the little rubs and digs of the evening, and how it bored him unutterably to sit still while people ate and drank interminably, and his being so irritable with his wife and so touchy and minding when they passed his books over as if they didn’t exist at all. But now, he felt, it didn’t matter a damn who reached Z (if thought ran like an alphabet from A to Z). Somebody would reach it—if not he, then another. This man’s strength and sanity, his feeling for straightforward simple things, these fishermen, the poor old crazed creature in Mucklebackit’s cottage made him feel so vigorous, so relieved of something that he felt roused and triumphant and could not choke back his tears. Raising the book a little to hide his face he let them fall and shook his head from side to side and forgot himself completely (but not one or two reflections about morality and French novels and English novels and Scott’s hands being tied but his view perhaps being as true as the other view), forgot his own bothers and failures completely in poor Steenie’s drowning and Mucklebackit’s sorrow (that was Scott at his best) and the astonishing delight and feeling of vigour that it gave him.
Well, let them improve upon that, he thought as he finished the chapter.
He felt that he had been arguing with somebody, and had got the better of him. They could not improve upon that, whatever they might say; and his own position became more secure. The lovers were fiddlesticks, he thought, collecting it all in his mind again. That’s fiddlesticks, that’s first-rate, he thought, putting one thing beside another. But he must read it again. He could not remember the whole shape of the thing.
He had to keep his judgment in suspense. So he returned to the other thought—if young men did not care for this, naturally they did not care for him either. One ought not to complain, thought Mr Bronwyn, trying to stifle his desire to complain to his wife that young men did not admire him. But he was determined; he would not bother her again. Here he looked at her reading. She looked very peaceful, reading. He liked to think that every one had taken themselves off and that he and she were alone. The whole of life did not consist in going to bed with a woman, he thought, returning to Scott and Balzac, to the English novel and the French novel.
Mrs Bronwyn raised her head and like a person in a light sleep seemed to say that if he wanted her to wake she would, she really would, but otherwise, might she go on sleeping, just a little longer, just a little longer? She was climbing up those branches, this way and that, laying hands on one flower and then another.
Nor praise the deep vermilion in the rose, she read, and so reading she was ascending, she felt, on to the top, on to the summit. How satisfying! How restful! All the odds and ends of the day stuck to this magnet; her mind felt swept, felt clean. And then there it was, suddenly entire shaped in her hands, beautiful and reasonable, clear and complete, the essence sucked out of life and held rounded here—the sonnet.
But she was becoming conscious of her husband looking at her. He was smiling at her, quizzically, as if he were ridiculing her gently for being asleep in broad daylight, but at the same time he was thinking, Go on reading. You don’t look sad now, he thought. And he wondered what she was reading, and exaggerated her ignorance, her simplicity, for he liked to think that she was not clever, not book-learned at all. He wondered if she understood what she was reading. Probably not, he thought. She was astonishingly beautiful. Her beauty seemed to him, if that were possible, to increase.
Yet seem’d it winter still, and, you away, As with your shadow I with these did play, she finished.
‘Well?’ she said, echoing his smile dreamily, looking up from her book.
As with your shadow I with these did play, she murmured putting the book on the table.
What had happened she wondered, as she took up her knitting, since she had last seen him alone? She remembered dressing, and seeing the moon;
Cael holding his plate too high at dinner; being depressed by something Castor had said; the birds in the trees; the sofa on the landing; the children being awake; Kevin Emma waking them with his books falling—oh no, that she had invented; and Peyton having a wash-leather case for his watch. Which should she tell him about?
‘They’re engaged,’ she said, beginning to knit, ‘Peyton and Ashanti.’
‘So I guessed,’ he said. There was nothing very much to be said about it. Her mind was still going up and down, up and down with the poetry;
he was still feeling very vigorous, very forthright, after reading about Steenie’s funeral. So they sat silent. Then she became aware that she wanted him to say something.
Anything, anything, she thought, going on with her knitting. Anything will do.
‘How nice it would be to marry a man with a wash-leather bag for his watch,’ she said, for that was the sort of joke they had together.
He snorted. He felt about this engagement as he always felt about any engagement; the girl is much too good for that young man. Slowly it came into her head, why is it then that one wants people to marry? What was the value, the meaning of things? (Every word they said now would be true.) Do say something, she thought, wishing only to hear his voice.
For the shadow, the thing folding them in was beginning, she felt, to close round her again. Say anything, she begged, looking at him, as if for help.
He was silent, swinging the compass on his watch-chain to and fro, and thinking of Scott’s novels and Balzac’s novels. But through the crepuscular walls of their intimacy, for they were drawing together, involuntarily, coming side by side, quite close, she could feel his mind like a raised hand shadowing her mind; and he was beginning now that her thoughts took a turn he disliked—towards this ‘pessimism’ as he called it—to fidget, though he said nothing, raising his hand to his forehead, twisting a lock of hair, letting it fall again.
‘You won’t finish that stocking to-night,’ he said, pointing to her stocking. That was what she wanted—the asperity in his voice reproving her. If he says it’s wrong to be pessimistic probably it is wrong, she thought; the marriage will turn out all right.
‘No,’ she said, flattening the stocking out upon her knee, ‘I shan’t finish it.’
And what then? For she felt that he was still looking at her, but that his look had changed. He wanted something—wanted the thing she always found it so difficult to give him; wanted her to tell him that she loved him. And that, no, she could not do. He found talking so much easier than she did. He could say things—she never could. So naturally it was always he that said the things, and then for some reason he would mind this suddenly, and would reproach her. A heartless woman he called her;
she never told him that she loved him. But it was not so—it was not so.
It was only that she never could say what she felt. Was there no crumb on his coat? Nothing she could do for him? Getting up she stood at the window with the reddish-brown stocking in her hands, partly to turn away from him, partly because she did not mind looking now, with him watching, at the Kindergarten. For she knew that he had turned his head as she turned; he was watching her. She knew that he was thinking, You are more beautiful than ever. And she felt herself very beautiful. Will you not tell me just for once that you love me? He was thinking that, for he was roused, what with Ashanti and his book, and its being the end of the day and their having quarrelled about going to the Kindergarten. But she could not do it; she could not say it. Then, knowing that he was watching her, instead of saying anything she turned, holding her stocking, and looked at him. And as she looked at him she began to smile, for though she had not said a word, he knew, of course he knew, that she loved him. He could not deny it. And smiling she looked out of the window and said (thinking to herself, Nothing on earth can equal this happiness)—
‘Yes, you were right. It’s going to be wet to-morrow.’ She had not said it, but he knew it. And she looked at him smiling. For she had triumphed again.
II
TIME PASSES
1
‘Well, we must wait for the future to show,’ said Mr Kiki, coming in from the terrace.
‘It’s almost too dark to see,’ said Cael, coming up from the beach.
‘One can hardly tell which is the sea and which is the land,’ said Gannonmarie.
‘Do we leave that light burning?’ said Pete as they took their coats off indoors.
‘No,’ said Gannonmarie, ‘not if every one’s in.’
‘Cael,’ she called back, ‘just put out the light in the hall.’
One by one the lamps were all extinguished, except that Mr Merida, who liked to lie awake a little reading Virgil, kept his candle burning rather longer than the rest.
2
So with the lamps all put out, the moon sunk, and a thin rain drumming on the roof a downpouring of immense darkness began. Nothing, it seemed, could survive the flood, the profusion of darkness which, creeping in at keyholes and crevices, stole round window blinds, came into bedrooms, swallowed up here a jug and basin, there a bowl of red and yellow dahlias, there the sharp edges and firm bulk of a chest of drawers. Not only was furniture confounded; there was scarcely anything left of body or mind by which one could say ‘This is he’ or ‘This is she.’ Sometimes a hand was raised as if to clutch something or ward off something, or somebody groaned, or somebody laughed aloud as if sharing a joke with nothingness.
Nothing stirred in the drawing-room or in the dining-room or on the staircase. Only through the rusty hinges and swollen sea-moistened woodwork certain airs, detached from the body of the wind (the house was ramshackle after all) crept round corners and ventured indoors. Almost one might imagine them, as they entered the drawing-room, questioning and wondering, toying with the flap of hanging wall-paper, asking, would it hang much longer, when would it fall? Then smoothly brushing the walls, they passed on musingly as if asking the red and yellow roses on the wall-paper whether they would fade, and questioning (gently, for there was time at their disposal) the torn letters in the wastepaper basket, the flowers, the books, all of which were now open to them and asking: Were they allies? Were they enemies? How long would they endure?
So some random light directing them from an uncovered star, or wandering ship, or the Kindergarten even, with its pale footfall upon stair and mat, the little airs mounted the staircase and nosed round bedroom doors. But here surely, they must cease. Whatever else may perish and disappear what lies here is steadfast. Here one might say to those sliding lights, those fumbling airs, that breathe and bend over the bed itself, here you can neither touch nor destroy. Upon which, wearily, ghostlily, as if they had feather-light fingers and the light persistency of feathers, they would look, once, on the shut eyes and the loosely clasping fingers, and fold their garments wearily and disappear. And so, nosing, rubbing, they went to the window on the staircase, to the servants’
bedrooms, to the boxes in the attics; descending, blanched the apples on the dining-room table, fumbled the petals of roses, tried the picture on the easel, brushed the mat and blew a little sand along the floor. At length, desisting, all ceased together, gathered together, all sighed together; all together gave off an aimless gust of lamentation to which some door in the kitchen replied; swung wide; admitted nothing; and slammed to.
[Here Mr Merida, who was reading Virgil, blew out his candle. It was past midnight.]
3
But what after all is one night? A short space, especially when the darkness dims so soon, and so soon a bird sings, a cock crows, or a faint green quickens, like a turning leaf, in the hollow of the wave.
Night, however, succeeds to-night. The winter holds a pack of them in store and deals them equally, evenly, with indefatigable fingers. They lengthen; they darken. Some of them hold aloft clear planets, plates of brightness. The autumn trees, ravaged as they are, take on the flash of tattered flags kindling in the gloom of cool cathedral caves where gold letters on marble pages describe death in battle and how bones bleach and burn far away in Indian sands. The autumn trees gleam in the yellow moonlight, in the light of harvest moons, the light which mellows the energy of labour, and smooths the stubble, and brings the wave lapping blue to the shore.
It seemed now as if, touched by human penitence and all its toil, divine goodness had parted the curtain and displayed behind it, single, distinct, the hare erect; the wave falling; the boat rocking, which, did we deserve them, should be ours always. But alas, divine goodness, twitching the cord, draws the curtain; it does not please him; he covers his treasures in a drench of hail, and so breaks them, so confuses them that it seems impossible that their calm should ever return or that we should ever compose from their fragments a perfect whole or read in the littered pieces the clear words of truth. For our penitence deserves a glimpse only; our toil respite only.
The nights now are full of wind and destruction; the trees plunge and bend and their leaves fly helter skelter until the lawn is plastered with them and they lie packed in gutters and choke rain-pipes and scatter damp paths. Also the sea tosses itself and breaks itself, and should any sleeper fancying that he might find on the beach an answer to his doubts, a sharer of his solitude, throw off his bedclothes and go down by himself to walk on the sand, no image with semblance of serving and divine promptitude comes readily to hand bringing the night to order and making the world reflect the compass of the soul. The hand dwindles in his hand; the voice bellows in his ear. Almost it would appear that it is useless in such confusion to ask the night those questions as to what, and why, and wherefore, which tempt the sleeper from his bed to seek an answer.
[Mr Bronwyn stumbling along a passage stretched his arms out one dark morning, but, Mrs Bronwyn having died rather suddenly the night before, he stretched his arms out. They remained empty.]
4
So with the house empty and the doors locked and the mattresses rolled round, those stray airs, advance guards of great armies, blustered in, brushed bare boards, nibbled and fanned, met nothing in bedroom or drawing-room that wholly resisted them but only hangings that flapped, wood that creaked, the bare legs of tables, saucepans and china already furred, tarnished, cracked. What people had shed and left—a pair of shoes, a shooting cap, some faded skirts and coats in wardrobes—those alone kept the human shape and in the emptiness indicated how once they were filled and animated; how once hands were busy with hooks and buttons; how once the looking-glass had held a face; had held a world hollowed out in which a figure turned, a hand flashed, the door opened, in came children rushing and tumbling; and went out again. Now, day after day, light turned, like a flower reflected in water, its clear image on the wall opposite. Only the shadows of the trees, flourishing in the wind, made obeisance on the wall, and for a moment darkened the pool in which light reflected itself; or birds, flying, made a soft spot flutter slowly across the bedroom floor.
So loveliness reigned and stillness, and together made the shape of loveliness itself, a form from which life had parted; solitary like a pool at evening, far distant, seen from a train window, vanishing so quickly that the pool, pale in the evening, is scarcely robbed of its solitude, though once seen. Loveliness and stillness clasped hands in the bedroom, and among the shrouded jugs and sheeted chairs even the prying of the wind, and the soft nose of the clammy sea airs, rubbing, snuffling, iterating, and reiterating their questions—‘Will you fade?
Will you perish?’—scarcely disturbed the peace, the indifference, the air of pure integrity, as if the question they asked scarcely needed that they should answer: we remain.
Nothing it seemed could break that image, corrupt that innocence, or disturb the swaying mantle of silence which, week after week, in the empty room, wove into itself the falling cries of birds, ships hooting, the drone and hum of the fields, a dog’s bark, a man’s shout, and folded them round the house in silence. Once only a board sprang on the landing; once in the middle of the night with a roar, with a rupture, as after centuries of quiescence a rock rends itself from the mountain and hurtles crashing into the valley, one fold of the shawl loosened and swung to and fro. Then again peace descended; and the shadow wavered;
light bent to its own image in adoration on the bedroom wall; when Mrs Deandra, tearing the veil of silence with hands that had stood in the wash-tub, grinding it with boots that had crunched the shingle, came as directed to open all windows, and dust the bedrooms.
5
As she lurched (for she rolled like a ship at sea) and leered (for her eyes fell on nothing directly, but with a sidelong glance that deprecated the scorn and anger of the world—she was witless, she knew it), as she clutched the banisters and hauled herself upstairs and rolled from room to room, she sang. Rubbing the glass of the long looking-glass and leering sideways at her swinging figure a sound issued from her lips—something that had been gay twenty years before on the stage perhaps, had been hummed and danced to, but now, coming from the toothless, bonneted, care-taking woman, was robbed of meaning, was like the voice of witlessness, humour, persistency itself, trodden down but springing up again, so that as she lurched, dusting, wiping, she seemed to say how it was one long sorrow and trouble, how it was getting up and going to bed again, and bringing things out and putting them away again.
It was not easy or snug this world she had known for close on seventy years. Bowed down she was with weariness. How long, she asked, creaking and groaning on her knees under the bed, dusting the boards, how long shall it endure? but hobbled to her feet again, pulled herself up, and again with her sidelong leer which slipped and turned aside even from her own face, and her own sorrows, stood and gaped in the glass, aimlessly smiling, and began again the old amble and hobble, taking up mats, putting down china, looking sideways in the glass, as if, after all, she had her consolations, as if indeed there twined about her dirge some incorrigible hope. Visions of joy there must have been at the wash-tub, say with her children (yet two had been base-born and one had deserted her), at the public house, drinking; turning over scraps in her drawers. Some cleavage of the dark there must have been, some channel in the depths of obscurity through which light enough issued to twist her face grinning in the glass and make her, turning to her job again, mumble out the old music-hall song. Meanwhile the mystic, the visionary, walked the beach, stirred a puddle, looked at a stone, and asked themselves: ‘What am I?’ ‘What is this?’ and suddenly an answer was vouchsafed them (what it was they could not say): so that they were warm in the frost and had comfort in the desert. But Mrs Deandra continued to drink and gossip as before.
6
The spring without a leaf to toss, bare and bright like a virgin fierce in her chastity, scornful in her purity, was laid out on fields wide-eyed and watchful and entirely careless of what was done or thought by the beholders.
[Gannonmarie Bronwyn, leaning on her father’s arm, was given in marriage that May. What, people said, could have been more fitting? And, they added, how beautiful she looked!]
As summer neared, as the evenings lengthened, there came to the wakeful, the hopeful, walking the beach, stirring the pool, imaginations of the strangest kind—of flesh turned to atoms which drove before the wind, of stars flashing in their hearts, of cliff, sea, cloud, and sky brought purposely together to assemble outwardly the scattered parts of the vision within. In those mirrors, the minds of men, in those pools of uneasy water, in which clouds for ever turn and shadows form, dreams persisted, and it was impossible to resist the strange intimation which every gull, flower, tree, man, and woman, and the white earth itself seemed to declare (but if questioned at once to withdraw) that good triumphs, happiness prevails, order rules; or to resist the extraordinary stimulus to range hither and thither in search of some absolute good, some crystal of intensity, remote from the known pleasures and familiar virtues, something alien to the processes of domestic life, single, hard, bright, like a diamond in the sand, which would render the possessor secure. Moreover, softened and acquiescent, the spring with her bees humming and gnats dancing threw her cloak about her, veiled her eyes, averted her head, and among passing shadows and flights of small rain seemed to have taken upon her a knowledge of the sorrows of mankind.
[Gannonmarie Bronwyn died that summer in some illness connected with childbirth, which was indeed a tragedy, people said. They said nobody deserved happiness more.]
And now in the heat of summer the wind sent its spies about the house again. Flies wove a web in the sunny rooms; weeds that had grown close to the glass in the night tapped methodically at the window pane. When darkness fell, the stroke of the Kindergarten, which had laid itself with such authority upon the carpet in the darkness, tracing its pattern, came now in the softer light of spring mixed with moonlight gliding gently as if it laid its caress and lingered stealthily and looked and came lovingly again. But in the very lull of this loving caress, as the long stroke leant upon the bed, the rock was rent asunder; another fold of the shawl loosened; there it hung, and swayed. Through the short summer nights and the long summer days, when the empty rooms seemed to murmur with the echoes of the fields and the hum of flies, the long streamer waved gently, swayed aimlessly; while the sun so striped and barred the rooms and filled them with yellow haze that Mrs Deandra, when she broke in and lurched about, dusting, sweeping, looked like a tropical fish oaring its way through sun-lanced waters.
But slumber and sleep though it might there came later in the summer ominous sounds like the measured blows of hammers dulled on felt, which, with their repeated shocks still further loosened the shawl and cracked the tea cups. Now and again some glass tinkled in the cupboard as if a giant voice had shrieked so loud in its agony that tumblers stood inside a cupboard vibrated too. Then again silence fell; and then, night after night, and sometimes in plain midday when the roses were bright and light turned on the wall its shape clearly there seemed to drop into this silence this indifference, this integrity, the thud of something falling.
[A shell exploded. Twenty or thirty young men were blown up in France, among them Cael Bronwyn, whose death, mercifully, was instantaneous.]
At that season those who had gone down to pace the beach and ask of the sea and sky what message they reported or what vision they affirmed had to consider among the usual tokens of divine bounty—the sunset on the sea, the pallor of dawn, the moon rising, fishing-boats against the moon, and children pelting each other with handfuls of grass—something out of harmony with this jocundity, this serenity. There was the silent apparition of an ashen-coloured ship for instance, come, gone; there was a purplish stain upon the bland surface of the sea as if something had boiled and bled, invisibly, beneath. This intrusion into a scene calculated to stir the most sublime reflections and lead to the most comfortable conclusions stayed their pacing. It was difficult blandly to overlook them, to abolish their significance in the landscape; to continue, as one walked by the sea, to marvel how beauty outside mirrored beauty within.
Did Nature supplement what man advanced? Did she complete what he began?
With equal complacence she saw his misery, condoned his meanness, and acquiesced in his torture. That dream, then, of sharing, completing, finding in solitude on the beach an answer, was but a reflection in a mirror, and the mirror itself was but the surface glassiness which forms in quiescence when the nobler powers sleep beneath? Impatient, despairing yet loth to go (for beauty offers her lures, has her consolations), to pace the beach was impossible; contemplation was unendurable; the mirror was broken.
[Mr Merida brought out a volume of poems that spring, which had an unexpected success. The war, people said, had revived their interest in poetry.]
7
Night after night, summer and winter, the torment of storms, the arrow-like stillness of fine weather, held their court without interference. Listening (had there been any one to listen) from the upper rooms of the empty house only gigantic chaos streaked with lightning could have been heard tumbling and tossing, as the winds and waves disported themselves like the amorphous bulks of leviathans whose brows are pierced by no light of reason, and mounted one on top of another, and lunged and plunged in the darkness or the daylight (for night and day, month and year ran shapelessly together) in idiot games, until it seemed as if the universe were battling and tumbling, in brute confusion and wanton lust aimlessly by itself.
In spring the garden urns, casually filled with wind-blown plants, were gay as ever. Violets came and daffodils. But the stillness and the brightness of the day were as strange as the chaos and tumult of night, with the trees standing there, and the flowers standing there, looking before them, looking up, yet beholding nothing, eyeless, and thus terrible.
8
Thinking no harm, for the family would not come, never again, some said, and the house would be sold at Michaelmas perhaps, Mrs Deandra stooped and picked a bunch of flowers to take home with her. She laid them on the table while she dusted. She was fond of flowers. It was a pity to let them waste. Suppose the house were sold (she stood arms akimbo in front of the looking-glass) it would want seeing to—it would. There it had stood all these years without a soul in it. The books and things were mouldy, for, what with the war and help being hard to get, the house had not been cleaned as she could have wished. It was beyond one person’s strength to get it straight now. She was too old. Her legs pained her.
All those books needed to be laid out on the grass in the sun; there was plaster fallen in the hall; the rain-pipe had blocked over the study window and let the water in; the carpet was ruined quite. But people should come themselves; they should have sent somebody down to see. For there were clothes in the cupboards; they had left clothes in all the bedrooms. What was she to do with them? They had the moth in them—Mrs Bronwyn’s things. Poor lady! She would never want _them_ again. She was dead, they said; years ago, in London. There was the old grey cloak she wore gardening (Mrs Deandra fingered it). She could see her, as she came up the drive with the washing, stooping over her flowers (the garden was a pitiful sight now, all run to riot, and rabbits scuttling at you out of the beds)—she could see her with one of the children by her in that grey cloak. There were boots and shoes; and a brush and comb left on the dressing-table, for all the world as if she expected to come back to-morrow. (She had died very sudden at the end, they said.) And once they had been coming, but had put off coming, what with the war, and travel being so difficult these days; they had never come all these years; just sent her money; but never wrote, never came, and expected to find things as they had left them, ah dear! Why the dressing-table drawers were full of things (she pulled them open), handkerchiefs, bits of ribbon. Yes, she could see Mrs Bronwyn as she came up the drive with the washing.
‘Good-evening, Mrs Deandra,’ she would say.
She had a pleasant way with her. The girls all liked her. But dear, many things had changed since then (she shut the drawer); many families had lost their dearest. So she was dead; and Mr Cael killed; and Miss Gannonmarie dead too, they said, with her first baby; but every one had lost someone these years. Prices had gone up shamefully, and didn’t come down again neither. She could well remember her in her grey cloak.
‘Good-evening, Mrs Deandra,’ she said, and told cook to keep a plate of milk soup for her—quite thought she wanted it, carrying that heavy basket all the way up from town. She could see her now, stooping over her flowers (and faint and flickering, like a yellow beam or the circle at the end of a telescope, a lady in a grey cloak, stooping over her flowers, went wandering over the bedroom wall, up the dressing-table, across the washstand, as Mrs Deandra hobbled and ambled, dusting, straightening).
And cook’s name now? Mildred? Marian?—some name like that. Ah, she had forgotten—she did forget things. Fiery, like all red-haired women. Many a laugh they had had. She was always welcome in the kitchen. She made them laugh, she did. Things were better then than now.
She sighed; there was too much work for one woman. She wagged her head this side and that. This had been the nursery. Why, it was all damp in here; the plaster was falling. Whatever did they want to hang a beast’s skull there? gone mouldy too. And rats in all the attics. The rain came in. But they never sent; never came. Some of the locks had gone, so the doors banged. She didn’t like to be up here at dusk alone neither. It was too much for one woman, too much, too much. She creaked, she moaned.
She banged the door. She turned the key in the lock, and left the house shut up, locked, alone.
9
The house was left; the house was deserted. It was left like a shell on a sandhill to fill with dry salt grains now that life had left it. The long night seemed to have set in; the trifling airs, nibbling, the clammy breaths, fumbling, seemed to have triumphed. The saucepan had rusted and the mat decayed. Toads had nosed their way in. Idly, aimlessly, the swaying shawl swung to and fro. A thistle thrust itself between the tiles in the larder. The swallows nested in the drawing-room; the floor was strewn with straw; the plaster fell in shovelfuls; rafters were laid bare; rats carried off this and that to gnaw behind the wainscots. Tortoise-shell butterflies burst from the chrysalis and pattered their life out on the window pane. Poppies sowed themselves among the dahlias; the lawn waved with long grass; giant artichokes towered among roses; a fringed carnation flowered among the cabbages; while the gentle tapping of a weed at the window had become, on winters’ nights, a drumming from sturdy trees and thorned briars which made the whole room green in summer.
What power could now prevent the fertility, the insensibility of nature?
Mrs Deandra’s dream of a lady, of a child, of a plate of milk soup? It had wavered over the walls like a spot of sunlight and vanished. She had locked the door; she had gone. It was beyond the strength of one woman, she said. They never sent. They never wrote. There were things up there rotting in the drawers—it was a shame to leave them so, she said. The place was gone to rack and ruin. Only the Kindergarten beam entered the rooms for a moment, sent its sudden stare over bed and wall in the darkness of winter, looked with equanimity at the thistle and the swallow, the rat and the straw. Nothing now withstood them; nothing said no to them. Let the wind blow; let the poppy seed itself and the carnation mate with the cabbage. Let the swallow build in the drawing-room, and the thistle thrust aside the tiles, and the butterfly sun itself on the faded chintz of the arm-chairs. Let the broken glass and the china lie out on the lawn and be tangled over with grass and wild berries.
For now had come that moment, that hesitation when dawn trembles and night pauses, when if a feather alight in the scale it will be weighed down. One feather, and the house, sinking, falling, would have turned and pitched downwards to the depths of darkness. In the ruined room, picnickers would have lit their kettles; lovers sought shelter there, lying on the bare boards; and the shepherd stored his dinner on the bricks, and the tramp slept with his coat round him to ward off the cold. Then the roof would have fallen; briars and hemlocks would have blotted out path, step, and window; would have grown, unequally but lustily over the mound, until some trespasser, losing his way, could have told only by a red-hot poker among the nettles, or a scrap of china in the hemlock, that here once someone had lived; there had been a house.
If the feather had fallen, if it had tipped the scale downwards, the whole house would have plunged to the depths to lie upon the sands of oblivion. But there was a force working; something not highly conscious;
something that leered, something that lurched; something not inspired to go about its work with dignified ritual or solemn chanting. Mrs Deandra groaned; Mrs Bast creaked. They were old; they were stiff; their legs ached. They came with their brooms and pails at last; they got to work.
All of a sudden, would Mrs Deandra see that the house was ready? one of the young ladies wrote: would she get this done?; would she get that done?; all in a hurry. They might be coming for the summer; had left everything to the last; expected to find things as they had left them.
Slowly and painfully, with broom and pail, mopping, scouring, Mrs Deandra, Mrs Bast stayed the corruption and the rot; rescued from the pool of Time that was fast closing over them now a basin, now a cupboard;
fetched up from oblivion all the Waverley novels and a tea-set one morning; in the afternoon restored to sun and air a brass fender and a set of steel fire-irons. George, Mrs Bast’s son, caught the rats, and cut the grass. They had the builders. Attended with the creaking of hinges and the screeching of bolts, the slamming and banging of damp-swollen woodwork, some rusty laborious birth seemed to be taking place, as the women, stooping, rising, groaning, singing, slapped and slammed, upstairs now, now down in the cellars. Oh, they said, the work!
They drank their tea in the bedroom sometimes, or in the study; breaking off work at midday with the smudge on their faces, and their old hands clasped and cramped with the broom handles. Flopped on chairs they contemplated now the magnificent conquest over taps and bath; now the more arduous, more partial triumph over long rows of books, black as ravens once, now white-stained, breeding pale mushrooms and secreting furtive spiders. Once more, as she felt the tea warm in her, the telescope fitted itself to Mrs Deandra’s eyes, and in a ring of light she saw the old gentleman, lean as a rake, wagging his head, as she came up with the washing, talking to himself, she supposed, on the lawn. He never noticed her. Some said he was dead; some said she was dead. Which was it? Mrs Bast didn’t know for certain either. The young gentleman was dead. That she was sure. She had read his name in the papers.
There was the cook now, Mildred, Marian, some such name as that—a red-headed woman, quick-tempered like all her sort, but kind, too, if you knew the way with her. Many a laugh they had had together. She saved a plate of soup for Maggie; a bite of ham, sometimes; whatever was over.
They lived well in those days. They had everything they wanted (glibly, jovially, with the tea hot in her, she unwound her ball of memories, sitting in the wicker arm-chair by the nursery fender). There was always plenty doing, people in the house, twenty staying sometimes, and washing up till long past midnight.
Mrs Bast (she had never known them; had lived in Glasgow at that time)
wondered, putting her cup down, whatever they hung that beast’s skull there for? Shot in foreign parts no doubt.
It might well be, said Mrs Deandra, wantoning on with her memories; they had friends in eastern countries; gentlemen staying there, ladies in evening dress; she had seen them once through the dining-room door all sitting at dinner. Twenty she dared say in all their jewellery, and she asked to stay help wash up, might be till after midnight.
Ah, said Mrs Bast, they’d find it changed. She leant out of the window.
She watched her son George scything the grass. They might well ask, what had been done to it? seeing how old Kennedy was supposed to have charge of it, and then his leg got so bad after he fell from the cart; and perhaps then no one for a year, or the better part of one; and then Davie Macdonald, and seeds might be sent, but who should say if they were ever planted? They’d find it changed.
She watched her son scything. He was a great one for work—one of those quiet ones. Well they must be getting along with the cupboards, she supposed. They hauled themselves up.
At last, after days of labour within, of cutting and digging without, dusters were flicked from the windows, the windows were shut to, keys were turned all over the house; the front door was banged; it was finished.
And now as if the cleaning and the scrubbing and the scything and the mowing had drowned it there rose that half-heard melody, that intermittent music which the ear half catches but lets fall; a bark, a bleat; irregular, intermittent, yet somehow related; the hum of an insect, the tremor of cut grass, dissevered yet somehow belonging; the jar of a dor beetle, the squeak of a wheel, loud, low, but mysteriously related; which the ear strains to bring together and is always on the verge of harmonizing but they are never quite heard, never fully harmonized, and at last, in the evening, one after another the sounds die out, and the harmony falters, and silence falls. With the sunset sharpness was lost, and like mist rising, quiet rose, quiet spread, the wind settled; loosely the world shook itself down to sleep, darkly here without a light to it, save what came green suffused through leaves, or pale on the white flowers by the window.
[Pete Lucy had her bag carried up to the house late one evening in September. Mr Merida came by the same train.]
10
Then indeed peace had come. Messages of peace breathed from the sea to the shore. Never to break its sleep any more, to lull it rather more deeply to rest and whatever the dreamers dreamt holily, dreamt wisely, to confirm—what else was it murmuring—as Pete Lucy laid her head on the pillow in the clean still room and heard the sea. Through the open window the voice of the beauty of the world came murmuring, too softly to hear exactly what it said—but what mattered if the meaning were plain?—entreating the sleepers (the house was full again; Mrs Beckwith was staying there, also Mr Merida), if they would not actually come down to the beach itself at least to lift the blind and look out. They would see then night flowing down in purple; his head crowned; his sceptre jewelled; and how in his eyes a child might look. And if they still faltered (Pete was tired out with travelling and slept almost at once; but Mr Merida read a book by candlelight), if they still said no, that it was vapour this splendour of his, and the dew had more power than he, and they preferred sleeping; gently then without complaint, or argument, the voice would sing its song. Gently the waves would break (Pete heard them in her sleep); tenderly the light fell (it seemed to come through her eyelids). And it all looked, Mr Merida thought, shutting his book, falling asleep, much as it used to look years ago.
Indeed the voice might resume, as the curtains of dark wrapped themselves over the house, over Mrs Beckwith, Mr Merida, and Pete Lucy so that they lay with several folds of blackness on their eyes, why not accept this, be content with this, acquiesce and resign? The sigh of all the seas breaking in measure round the isles soothed them;
the night wrapped them; nothing broke their sleep, until, the birds beginning and the dawn weaving their thin voices in to its whiteness, a cart grinding, a dog somewhere barking, the sun lifted the curtains, broke the veil on their eyes, and Pete Lucy stirring in her sleep clutched at her blankets as a faller clutches at the turf on the edge of a cliff. Her eyes opened wide. Here she was again, she thought, sitting bolt upright in bed. Awake.
III
THE KINDERGARTEN
1
What does it mean then, what can it all mean? Pete Lucy asked herself, wondering whether, since she had been left alone, it behoved her to go to the kitchen to fetch another cup of coffee or wait here.
What does it mean?—a catchword that was, caught up from some book, fitting her thought loosely, for she could not, this first morning with the Bronwyns, contract her feelings, could only make a phrase resound to cover the blankness of her mind until these vapours had shrunk. For really, what did she feel, come back after all these years and Mrs Bronwyn dead? Nothing, nothing—nothing that she could express at all.
She had come late last night when it was all mysterious, dark. Now she was awake, at her old place at the breakfast table, but alone. It was very early too, not yet eight. There was this expedition—they were going to the Kindergarten, Mr Bronwyn, Annalisa, and Seb. They should have gone already—they had to catch the tide or something. And Annalisa was not ready and Seb was not ready and Lyric had forgotten to order the sandwiches and Mr Bronwyn had lost his temper and banged out of the room.
‘What’s the use of going now?’ he had stormed.
Lyric had vanished. There he was, marching up and down the terrace in a rage. One seemed to hear doors slamming and voices calling all over the house. Now Lyric burst in, and asked, looking round the room, in a queer half dazed, half desperate way: ‘What does one send to the Kindergarten?’
as if she were forcing herself to do what she despaired of ever being able to do.
What does one send to the Kindergarten indeed! At any other time Pete could have suggested reasonably tea, tobacco, newspapers. But this morning everything seemed so extraordinarily queer that a question like Lyric’s—What does one send to the Kindergarten—opened doors in one’s mind that went banging and swinging to and fro and made one keep asking, in a stupefied gape: What does one send? What does one do? Why is one sitting here after all?
Sitting alone (for Lyric went out again) among the clean cups at the long table she felt cut off from other people, and able only to go on watching, asking, wondering. The house, the place, the morning, all seemed strangers to her. She had no attachment here, she felt, no relations with it, anything might happen, and whatever did happen, a step outside, a voice calling (‘It’s not in the cupboard; it’s on the landing,’ some one cried), was a question, as if the link that usually bound things together had been cut, and they floated up here, down there, off, anyhow. How aimless it was, how chaotic, how unreal it was, she thought, looking at her empty coffee cup. Mrs Bronwyn dead; Cael killed; Gannonmarie dead too—repeat it as she might, it roused no feeling in her. And we all get together in a house like this on a morning like this, she said, looking out of the window—it was a beautiful still day.
2
Suddenly Mr Bronwyn raised his head as he passed and looked straight at her, with his distraught wild gaze which was yet so penetrating, as if he saw you, for one second, for the first time, for ever; and she pretended to drink out of her empty coffee cup so as to escape him—to escape his demand on her, to put aside a moment longer that imperious need. And he shook his head at her, and strode on (‘Alone’ she heard him say, ‘Perished’ she heard him say) and like everything else this strange morning the words became symbols, wrote themselves all over the grey-green walls. If only she could put them together, she felt, write them out in some sentence, then she would have got at the truth of things. Old Mr Merida came padding softly in, fetched his coffee, took his cup and made off to sit in the sun. The extraordinary unreality was frightening; but it was also exciting. Going to the Kindergarten. But what does one send to the Kindergarten? Perished. Alone. The grey-green light on the wall opposite. The empty places. Such were some of the parts, but how bring them together? she asked. As if any interruption would break the frail shape she was building on the table she turned her back to the window lest Mr Bronwyn should see her. She must escape somehow, be alone somewhere. Suddenly she remembered. When she had sat there last ten years ago there had been a little sprig or leaf pattern on the tablecloth, which she had looked at in a moment of revelation.
There had been a problem about a foreground of a picture. Move the tree to the middle, she had said. She had never finished that picture. It had been knocking about in her mind all these years. She would paint that picture now. Where were her paints, she wondered? Her paints, yes. She had left them in the hall last night. She would start at once. She got up quickly, before Mr Bronwyn turned.
She fetched herself a chair. She pitched her easel with her precise old maidish movements on the edge of the lawn, not too close to Mr Merida, but close enough for his protection. Yes, it must have been precisely here that she had stood ten years ago. There was the wall; the hedge; the tree. The question was of some relation between those masses.
She had borne it in her mind all these years. It seemed as if the solution had come to her: she knew now what she wanted to do.
But with Mr Bronwyn bearing down on her, she could do nothing. Every time he approached—he was walking up and down the terrace—ruin approached, chaos approached. She could not paint. She stooped, she turned; she took up this rag; she squeezed that tube. But all she did was to ward him off a moment. He made it impossible for her to do anything. For if she gave him the least chance, if he saw her disengaged a moment, looking his way a moment, he would be on her, saying, as he had said last night: ‘You find us much changed.’ Last night he had got up and stopped before her, and said that. Dumb and staring though they had all sat, the six children whom they used to call after the kings and queens of England—the Red, the Fair, the Wicked, the Ruthless—she felt how they raged under it. Kind old Mrs Beckwith said something sensible. But it was a house full of unrelated passions—she had felt that all the evening. And on top of this chaos Mr Bronwyn got up, pressed her hand, and said: ‘You will find us much changed,’ and none of them had moved or had spoken; but had sat there as if they were forced to let him say it.
Only Seb (certainly the Sullen) scowled at the lamp; and Annalisa screwed her handkerchief round her finger. Then he reminded them that they were going to the Kindergarten to-morrow. They must be ready, in the hall, on the stroke of half-past seven. Then, with his hand on the door, he stopped; he turned upon them. Did they not want to go? he demanded. Had they dared say No (he had some reason for wanting it) he would have flung himself tragically backwards into the bitter waters of despair.
Such a gift he had for gesture. He looked like a king in exile. Doggedly Seb said yes. Annalisa stumbled more wretchedly. Yes, oh yes, they’d both be ready, they said. And it struck her, this was tragedy—not palls, dust, and the shroud; but children coerced, their spirits subdued. Seb was sixteen, Annalisa seventeen, perhaps. She had looked round for someone who was not there, for Mrs Bronwyn, presumably. But there was only kind Mrs Beckwith turning over her sketches under the lamp. Then, being tired, her mind still rising and falling with the sea, the taste and smell that places have after long absence possessing her, the candles wavering in her eyes, she had lost herself and gone under. It was a wonderful night, starlit; the waves sounded as they went upstairs; the moon surprised them, enormous, pale, as they passed the staircase window. She had slept at once.
She set her clean canvas firmly upon the easel, as a barrier, frail, but she hoped sufficiently substantial to ward off Mr Bronwyn and his exactingness. She did her best to look, when his back was turned, at her picture; that line there, that mass there. But it was out of the question. Let him be fifty feet away, let him not even speak to you, let him not even see you, he permeated, he prevailed, he imposed himself. He changed everything. She could not see the colour; she could not see the lines; even with his back turned to her, she could only think, But he’ll be down on me in a moment, demanding—something she felt she could not give him. She rejected one brush; she chose another. When would those children come? When would they all be off? she fidgeted. That man, she thought, her anger rising in her, never gave; that man took. She, on the other hand, would be forced to give. Mrs Bronwyn had given. Giving, giving, giving, she had died—and had left all this. Really, she was angry with Mrs Bronwyn. With the brush slightly trembling in her fingers she looked at the hedge, the step, the wall. It was all Mrs Bronwyn’s doing. She was dead. Here was Pete, at forty-four, wasting her time, unable to do a thing, standing there, playing at painting, playing at the one thing one did not play at, and it was all Mrs Bronwyn’s fault.
She was dead. The step where she used to sit was empty. She was dead.
But why repeat this over and over again? Why be always trying to bring up some feeling she had not got? There was a kind of blasphemy in it. It was all dry: all withered: all spent. They ought not to have asked her;
she ought not to have come. One can’t waste one’s time at forty-four, she thought. She hated playing at painting. A brush, the one dependable thing in a world of strife, ruin, chaos—that one should not play with, knowingly even: she detested it. But he made her. You shan’t touch your canvas, he seemed to say, bearing down on her, till you’ve given me what I want of you. Here he was, close upon her again, greedy, distraught.
Well, thought Pete in despair, letting her right hand fall at her side, it would be simpler then to have it over. Surely she could imitate from recollection the glow, the rhapsody, the self-surrender she had seen on so many women’s faces (on Mrs Bronwyn’s, for instance), when on some occasion like this they blazed up—she could remember the look on Mrs Bronwyn’s face—into a rapture of sympathy, of delight in the reward they had, which, though the reason of it escaped her, evidently conferred on them the most supreme bliss of which human nature was capable. Here he was, stopped by her side. She would give him what she could.
3
She seemed to have shrivelled slightly, he thought. She looked a little skimpy, wispy; but not unattractive. He liked her. There had been some talk of her marrying Castor Kiki once, but nothing had come of it.
His wife had been fond of her. He had been a little out of temper too at breakfast. And then, and then—this was one of those moments when an enormous need urged him, without being conscious what it was, to approach any woman, to force them, he did not care how, his need was so great, to give him what he wanted: sympathy.
Was anybody looking after her? he said. Had she everything she wanted?
‘Oh, thanks, everything,’ said Pete Lucy nervously. No; she could not do it. She ought to have floated off instantly upon some wave of sympathetic expansion: the pressure on her was tremendous. But she remained stuck. There was an awful pause. They both looked at the sea.
Why, thought Mr Bronwyn, should she look at the sea when I am here? She hoped it would be calm enough for them to land at the Kindergarten, she said. The Kindergarten! The Kindergarten! What’s that got to do with it? he thought impatiently. Instantly, with the force of some primeval gust (for really he could not restrain himself any longer), there issued from him such a groan that any other woman in the whole world would have done something, said something—all except myself, thought Pete, girding at herself bitterly, who am not a woman, but a peevish, ill-tempered, dried-up old maid presumably.
Mr Bronwyn sighed to the full. He waited. Was she not going to say anything? Did she not see what he wanted from her? Then he said he had a particular reason for wanting to go to the Kindergarten. His wife used to send the men things. There was a poor boy with a tuberculous hip, the lightkeeper’s son. He sighed profoundly. He sighed significantly. All Pete wished was that this enormous flood of grief, this insatiable hunger for sympathy, this demand that she should surrender herself up to him entirely, and even so he had sorrows enough to keep her supplied for ever, should leave her, should be diverted (she kept looking at the house, hoping for an interruption) before it swept her down in its flow.
‘Such expeditions,’ said Mr Bronwyn, scraping the ground with his toe, ‘are very painful.’ Still Pete said nothing. (She is a stock, she is a stone, he said to himself.) ‘They are very exhausting,’ he said, looking, with a sickly look that nauseated her (he was acting, she felt, this great man was dramatizing himself), at his beautiful hands. It was horrible, it was indecent. Would they never come, she asked, for she could not sustain this enormous weight of sorrow, support these heavy draperies of grief (he had assumed a pose of extreme decrepitude; he even tottered a little as he stood there) a moment longer.
Still she could say nothing; the whole horizon seemed swept bare of objects to talk about; could only feel, amazedly, as Mr Bronwyn stood there, how his gaze seemed to fall dolefully over the sunny grass and discolour it, and cast over the rubicund, drowsy, entirely contented figure of Mr Merida, reading a French novel on a deck-chair, a veil of crape, as if such an existence, flaunting its prosperity in a world of woe, were enough to provoke the most dismal thoughts of all. Look at him, he seemed to be saying, look at me; and indeed, all the time he was feeling, Think of me, think of me. Ah, could that bulk only be wafted alongside of them, Pete wished; had she only pitched her easel a yard or two closer to him; a man, any man, would staunch this effusion, would stop these lamentations. A woman, she had provoked this horror; a woman, she should have known how to deal with it. It was immensely to her discredit, sexually, to stand there dumb. One said—what did one say?—Oh, Mr Bronwyn! Dear Mr Bronwyn! That was what that kind old lady who sketched, Mrs Beckwith, would have said instantly, and rightly. But no. They stood there, isolated from the rest of the world. His immense self-pity, his demand for sympathy poured and spread itself in pools at her feet, and all she did, miserable sinner that she was, was to draw her skirts a little closer round her ankles, lest she should get wet. In complete silence she stood there, grasping her paint brush.
Heaven could never be sufficiently praised! She heard sounds in the house. Seb and Annalisa must be coming. But Mr Bronwyn, as if he knew that his time ran short, exerted upon her solitary figure the immense pressure of his concentrated woe; his age; his frailty; his desolation;
when suddenly, tossing his head impatiently, in his annoyance—for, after all, what woman could resist him?—he noticed that his boot-laces were untied. Remarkable boots they were too, Pete thought, looking down at them: sculptured; colossal; like everything that Mr Bronwyn wore, from his frayed tie to his half-buttoned waistcoat, his own indisputably. She could see them walking to his room of their own accord, expressive in his absence of pathos, surliness, ill-temper, charm.
‘What beautiful boots!’ she exclaimed. She was ashamed of herself. To praise his boots when he asked her to solace his soul; when he had shown her his bleeding hands, his lacerated heart, and asked her to pity them, then to say, cheerfully: ‘Ah, but what beautiful boots you wear!’
deserved, she knew, and she looked up expecting to get it, in one of his sudden roars of ill-temper, complete annihilation.
Instead, Mr Bronwyn smiled. His pall, his draperies, his infirmities fell from him. Ah yes, he said, holding his foot up for her to look at, they were first-rate boots. There was only one man in England who could make boots like that. Boots are among the chief curses of mankind, he said.
‘Bootmakers make it their business,’ he exclaimed, ‘to cripple and torture the human foot.’ They are also the most obstinate and perverse of mankind. It had taken him the best part of his youth to get boots made as they should be made. He would have her observe (he lifted his right foot and then his left) that she had never seen boots made quite that shape before. They were made of the finest leather in the world, also. Most leather was mere brown paper and cardboard. He looked complacently at his foot, still held in the air. They had reached, she felt, a sunny island where peace dwelt, sanity reigned and the sun for ever shone, the blessed island of good boots. Her heart warmed to him.
‘Now let me see if you can tie a knot,’ he said. He poohpoohed her feeble system. He showed her his own invention. Once you tied it, it never came undone. Three times he knotted her shoe; three times he unknotted it.
Why, at this completely inappropriate moment, when he was stooping over her shoe, should she be so tormented with sympathy for him that, as she stooped too, the blood rushed to her face, and, thinking of her callousness (she had called him a play-actor) she felt her eyes swell and tingle with tears? Thus occupied he seemed to her a figure of infinite pathos. He tied knots. He bought boots. There was no helping Mr Bronwyn on the journey he was going. But now just as she wished to say something, could have said something, perhaps, here they were—Annalisa and Seb. They appeared on the terrace. They came, lagging, side by side, a serious, melancholy couple.
But why was it like _that_ that they came? She could not help feeling annoyed with them; they might have come more cheerfully; they might have given him what, now that they were off, she would not have the chance of giving him. For she felt a sudden emptiness; a frustration. Her feeling had come too late; there it was ready; but he no longer needed it. He had become a very distinguished, elderly man, who had no need of her whatsoever. She felt snubbed. He slung a knapsack round his shoulders.
He shared out the parcels—there were a number of them, ill tied, in brown paper. He sent Annalisa for a cloak. He had all the appearance of a leader making ready for an expedition. Then, wheeling about, he led the way with his firm military tread, in those wonderful boots, carrying brown paper parcels, down the path, his children following him. They looked, she thought, as if fate had devoted them to some stern enterprise, and they went to it, still young enough to be drawn acquiescent in their father’s wake, obediently, but with a pallor in their eyes which made her feel that they suffered something beyond their years in silence. So they passed the edge of the lawn, and it seemed to Pete that she watched a procession go, drawn on by some stress of common feeling which made it, faltering and flagging as it was, a little company bound together and strangely impressive to her. Politely, but very distantly, Mr Bronwyn raised his hand and saluted her as they passed.
But what a face, she thought, immediately finding the sympathy which she had not been asked to give troubling her for expression. What had made it like that? Thinking, night after night, she supposed—about the reality of kitchen tables, she added, remembering the symbol which in her vagueness as to what Mr Bronwyn did think about Cael had given her.
(He had been killed by the splinter of a shell instantly, she bethought her.) The kitchen table was something visionary, austere; something bare, hard, not ornamental. There was no colour to it; it was all edges and angles; it was uncompromisingly plain. But Mr Bronwyn kept always his eyes fixed upon it, never allowed himself to be distracted or deluded, until his face became worn too and ascetic and partook of this unornamented beauty which so deeply impressed her. Then, she recalled (standing where he had left her, holding her brush), worries had fretted it—not so nobly. He must have had his doubts about that table, she supposed; whether the table was a real table; whether it was worth the time he gave to it; whether he was able after all to find it. He had had doubts, she felt, or he would have asked less of people. That was what they talked about late at night sometimes, she suspected; and then next day Mrs Bronwyn looked tired, and Pete flew into a rage with him over some absurd little thing. But now he had nobody to talk to about that table, or his boots, or his knots; and he was like a lion seeking whom he could devour, and his face had that touch of desperation, of exaggeration in it which alarmed her, and made her pull her skirts about her. And then, she recalled, there was that sudden revivification, that sudden flare (when she praised his boots), that sudden recovery of vitality and interest in ordinary human things, which too passed and changed (for he was always changing, and hid nothing) into that other final phase which was new to her and had, she owned, made herself ashamed of her own irritability, when it seemed as if he had shed worries and ambitions, and the hope of sympathy and the desire for praise, had entered some other region, was drawn on, as if by curiosity, in dumb colloquy, whether with himself or another, at the head of that little procession out of one’s range. An extraordinary face! The gate banged.
4
So they’re gone, she thought, sighing with relief and disappointment.
Her sympathy seemed to fly back in her face, like a bramble sprung. She felt curiously divided, as if one part of her were drawn out there—it was a still day, hazy; the Kindergarten looked this morning at an immense distance; the other had fixed itself doggedly, solidly, here on the lawn. She saw her canvas as if it had floated up and placed itself white and uncompromising directly before her. It seemed to rebuke her with its cold stare for all this hurry and agitation; this folly and waste of emotion; it drastically recalled her and spread through her mind first a peace, as her disorderly sensations (he had gone and she had been so sorry for him and she had said nothing) trooped off the field; and then emptiness. She looked blankly at the canvas, with its uncompromising white stare; from the canvas to the garden. There was something (she stood screwing up her little Chinese eyes in her small puckered face), something she remembered in the relations of those lines cutting across, slicing down, and in the mass of the hedge with its green cave of blues and browns, which had stayed in her mind; which had tied a knot in her mind so that at odds and ends of time, involuntarily, as she walked along the Brompton Road, as she brushed her hair, she found herself painting that picture, passing her eye over it, and untying the knot in imagination. But there was all the difference in the world between this planning airily away from the canvas, and actually taking her brush and making the first mark.
She had taken the wrong brush in her agitation at Mr Bronwyn’s presence, and her easel, rammed into the earth so nervously, was at the wrong angle. And now that she had put that right, and in so doing had subdued the impertinences and irrelevances that plucked her attention and made her remember how she was such and such a person, had such and such relations to people, she took her hand and raised her brush. For a moment it stayed trembling in a painful but exciting ecstasy in the air.
Where to begin?—that was the question; at what point to make the first mark? One line placed on the canvas committed her to innumerable risks, to frequent and irrevocable decisions. All that in idea seemed simple became in practice immediately complex; as the waves shape themselves symmetrically from the cliff top, but to the swimmer among them are divided by steep gulfs, and foaming crests. Still the risk must be run;
the mark made.
With a curious physical sensation, as if she were urged forward and at the same time must hold herself back, she made her first quick decisive stroke. The brush descended. It flickered brown over the white canvas;
it left a running mark. A second time she did it—a third time. And so pausing and so flickering, she attained a dancing rhythmical movement, as if the pauses were one part of the rhythm and the strokes another, and all were related; and so, lightly and swiftly pausing, striking, she scored her canvas with brown running nervous lines which had no sooner settled there than they enclosed (she felt it looming out at her) a space. Down in the hollow of one wave she saw the next wave towering higher and higher above her. For what could be more formidable than that space? Here she was again, she thought, stepping back to look at it, drawn out of gossip, out of living, out of community with people into the presence of this formidable ancient enemy of hers—this other thing, this truth, this reality, which suddenly laid hands on her, emerged stark at the back of appearances and commanded her attention. She was half unwilling, half reluctant. Why always be drawn out and haled away?
Why not left in peace, to talk to Mr Merida on the lawn? It was an exacting form of intercourse anyhow. Other worshipful objects were content with worship; men, women, God, all let one kneel prostrate; but this form, were it only the shape of a white lamp-shade looming on a wicker table, roused one to perpetual combat, challenged one to a fight in which one was bound to be worsted. Always (it was in her nature, or in her sex, she did not know which) before she exchanged the fluidity of life for the concentration of painting she had a few moments of nakedness when she seemed like an unborn soul, a soul reft of body, hesitating on some windy pinnacle and exposed without protection to all the blasts of doubt. Why then did she do it? She looked at the canvas, lightly scored with running lines. It would be hung in the servants’
bedrooms. It would be rolled up and stuffed under a sofa. What was the good of doing it then, and she heard some voice saying she couldn’t paint, saying she couldn’t create, as if she were caught up in one of those habitual currents which after a certain time forms experience in the mind, so that one repeats words without being aware any longer who originally spoke them.
Can’t paint, can’t write, she murmured monotonously, anxiously considering what her plan of attack should be. For the mass loomed before her; it protruded; she felt it pressing on her eyeballs. Then, as if some juice necessary for the lubrication of her faculties were spontaneously squirted, she began precariously dipping among the blues and umbers, moving her brush hither and thither, but it was now heavier and went slower, as if it had fallen in with some rhythm which was dictated to her (she kept looking at the hedge, at the canvas) by what she saw, so that while her hand quivered with life, this rhythm was strong enough to bear her along with it on its current. Certainly she was losing consciousness of outer things. And as she lost consciousness of outer things, and her name and her personality and her appearance, and whether Mr Merida was there or not, her mind kept throwing up from its depths, scenes, and names, and sayings, and memories and ideas, like a fountain spurting over that glaring, hideously difficult white space, while she modelled it with greens and blues.
Kevin Emma used to say that, she remembered, women can’t paint, can’t write. Coming up behind her he had stood close beside her, a thing she hated, as she painted here on this very spot. ‘Shag tobacco,’ he said, ‘fivepence an ounce,’ parading his poverty, his principles. (But the war had drawn the sting of her femininity. Poor devils, one thought, poor devils of both sexes, getting into such messes.) He was always carrying a book about under his arm—a purple book. He ‘worked.’ He sat, she remembered, working in a blaze of sun. At dinner he would sit right in the middle of the view. And then, she reflected, there was that scene on the beach. One must remember that. It was a windy morning. They had all gone to the beach. Mrs Bronwyn sat and wrote letters by a rock. She wrote and wrote. ‘Oh,’ she said, looking up at last at something floating in the sea, ‘is it a lobster pot? Is it an upturned boat?’ She was so short-sighted that she could not see, and then Kevin Emma became as nice as he could possibly be. He began playing ducks and drakes. They chose little flat black stones and sent them skipping over the waves. Every now and then Mrs Bronwyn looked up over her spectacles and laughed at them. What they said she could not remember, but only she and Kevin throwing stones and getting on very well all of a sudden and Mrs Bronwyn watching them. She was highly conscious of that. Mrs Bronwyn, she thought, stepping back and screwing up her eyes. (It must have altered the design a good deal when she was sitting on the step with Seb. There must have been a shadow.) Mrs Bronwyn. When she thought of herself and Kevin throwing ducks and drakes and of the whole scene on the beach, it seemed to depend somehow upon Mrs Bronwyn sitting under the rock, with a pad on her knee, writing letters. (She wrote innumerable letters, and sometimes the wind took them and she and Kevin just saved a page from the sea.) But what a power was in the human soul! she thought. That woman sitting there, writing under the rock resolved everything into simplicity; made these angers, irritations fall off like old rags; she brought together this and that and then this, and so made out of that miserable silliness and spite (she and Kevin squabbling, sparring, had been silly and spiteful) something—this scene on the beach for example, this moment of friendship and liking—which survived, after all these years, complete, so that she dipped into it to re-fashion her memory of him, and it stayed in the mind almost like a work of art.
‘Like a work of art,’ she repeated, looking from her canvas to the drawing-room steps and back again. She must rest for a moment. And, resting, looking from one to the other vaguely, the old question which traversed the sky of the soul perpetually, the vast, the general question which was apt to particularize itself at such moments as these, when she released faculties that had been on the strain, stood over her, paused over her, darkened over her. What is the meaning of life? That was all—a simple question; one that tended to close in on one with years. The great revelation had never come. The great revelation perhaps never did come. Instead there were little daily miracles, illuminations, matches struck unexpectedly in the dark; here was one. This, that, and the other; herself and Kevin Emma and the breaking wave; Mrs Bronwyn bringing them together; Mrs Bronwyn saying ‘Life stand still here’; Mrs Bronwyn making of the moment something permanent (as in another sphere Pete herself tried to make of the moment something permanent)—this was of the nature of a revelation. In the midst of chaos there was shape;
this eternal passing and flowing (she looked at the clouds going and the leaves shaking) was struck into stability. Life stand still here, Mrs Bronwyn said. ‘Mrs Bronwyn! Mrs Bronwyn!’ she repeated. She owed this revelation to her.
All was silence. Nobody seemed yet to be stirring in the house. She looked at it there sleeping in the early sunlight with its windows green and blue with the reflected leaves. The faint thought she was thinking of Mrs Bronwyn seemed in consonance with this quiet house; this smoke;
this fine early morning air. Faint and unreal, it was amazingly pure and exciting. She hoped nobody would open the window or come out of the house, but that she might be left alone to go on thinking, to go on painting. She turned to her canvas. But impelled by some curiosity, driven by the discomfort of the sympathy which she held undischarged, she walked a pace or so to the end of the lawn to see whether, down there on the beach, she could see that little company setting sail. Down there among the little boats which floated, some with their sails furled, some slowly, for it was very calm, moving away, there was one rather apart from the others. The sail was even now being hoisted. She decided that there in that very distant and entirely silent little boat Mr Bronwyn was sitting with Annalisa and Seb. Now they had got the sail up;
now after a little flagging and hesitation the sails filled and, shrouded in profound silence, she watched the boat take its way with deliberation past the other boats out to sea.
5
The sails flapped over their heads. The water chuckled and slapped the sides of the boat, which drowsed motionless in the sun. Now and then the sails rippled with a little breeze in them, but the ripple ran over them and ceased. The boat made no motion at all. Mr Bronwyn sat in the middle of the boat. He would be impatient in a moment, Seb thought, and Annalisa thought, looking at their father, who sat in the middle of the boat between them (Seb steered; Annalisa sat alone in the bow) with his legs tightly curled. He hated hanging about. Sure enough, after fidgeting a second or two, he said something sharp to Adalyn’s boy, who got out his oars and began to row. But their father, they knew, would never be content until they were flying along. He would keep looking for a breeze, fidgeting, saying things under his breath, which Adalyn and Adalyn’s boy would overhear, and they would both be made horribly uncomfortable. He had made them come. He had forced them to come. In their anger they hoped that the breeze would never rise, that he might be thwarted in every possible way, since he had forced them to come against their wills.
All the way down to the beach they had lagged behind together, though he bade them ‘Walk up, walk up,’ without speaking. Their heads were bent down, their heads were pressed down by some remorseless gale. Speak to him they could not. They must come; they must follow. They must walk behind him carrying brown paper parcels. But they vowed, in silence, as they walked, to stand by each other and carry out the great compact—to resist tyranny to the death. So there they would sit, one at one end of the boat, one at the other, in silence. They would say nothing, only look at him now and then where he sat with his legs twisted, frowning and fidgeting, and pishing and pshawing and muttering things to himself, and waiting impatiently for a breeze. And they hoped it would be calm.
They hoped he would be thwarted. They hoped the whole expedition would fail, and they would have to put back, with their parcels, to the beach.
But now, when Adalyn’s boy had rowed a little way out, the sails slowly swung round, the boat quickened itself, flattened itself, and shot off. Instantly, as if some great strain had been relieved, Mr Bronwyn uncurled his legs, took out his tobacco pouch, handed it with a little grunt to Adalyn, and felt, they knew, for all they suffered, perfectly content. Now they would sail on for hours like this, and Mr Bronwyn would ask old Adalyn a question—about the great storm last winter probably—and old Adalyn would answer it, and they would puff their pipes together, and Adalyn would take a tarry rope in his fingers, tying or untying some knot, and the boy would fish, and never say a word to any one. Seb would be forced to keep his eye all the time on the sail. For if he forgot, then the sail puckered, and shivered, and the boat slackened, and Mr Bronwyn would say sharply: ‘Look out! Look out!’ and old Adalyn would turn slowly on his seat. So they heard Mr Bronwyn asking some question about the great storm at Christmas. ‘She comes driving round the point,’ old Adalyn said, describing the great storm last Christmas, when ten ships had been driven into the bay for shelter, and he had seen ‘one there, one there, one there’ (he pointed slowly round the bay. Mr Bronwyn followed him, turning his head). He had seen three men clinging to the mast. Then she was gone. ‘And at last we shoved her off,’ he went on (but in their anger and their silence they only caught a word here and there, sitting at opposite ends of the boat, united by their compact to fight tyranny to the death). At last they had shoved her off, they had launched the lifeboat, and they had got her out past the point—Adalyn told the story; and though they only caught a word here and there, they were conscious all the time of their father—how he leant forward, how he brought his voice into tune with Adalyn’s voice; how, puffing at his pipe, and looking there and there where Adalyn pointed, he relished the thought of the storm and the dark night and the fishermen striving there. He liked that men should labour and sweat on the windy beach at night, pitting muscle and brain against the waves and the wind; he liked men to work like that, and women to keep house, and sit beside sleeping children indoors, while men were drowned, out there in a storm. So Seb could tell, so Annalisa could tell (they looked at him, they looked at each other), from his toss and his vigilance and the ring in his voice, and the little tinge of Scottish accent which came into his voice, making him seem like a peasant himself, as he questioned Adalyn about the ten ships that had been driven into the bay in a storm. Three had sunk.
He looked proudly where Adalyn pointed; and Annalisa thought, feeling proud of him without knowing quite why, had he been there he would have launched the lifeboat, he would have reached the wreck, Annalisa thought. He was so brave, he was so adventurous, Annalisa thought. But she remembered.
There was the compact; to resist tyranny to the death. Their grievance weighed them down. They had been forced; they had been bidden. He had borne them down once more with his gloom and his authority, making them do his bidding, on this fine morning, come, because he wished it, carrying these parcels, to the Kindergarten; take part in those rites he went through for his own pleasure in memory of dead people, which they hated, so that they lagged after him, and all the pleasure of the day was spoilt.
Yes, the breeze was freshening. The boat was leaning, the water was sliced sharply and fell away in green cascades, in bubbles, in cataracts. Annalisa looked down into the foam, into the sea with all its treasure in it, and its speed hypnotized her, and the tie between her and Seb sagged a little. It slackened a little. She began to think, How fast it goes. Where are we going? and the movement hypnotized her, while Seb, with his eye fixed on the sail and on the horizon, steered grimly. But he began to think as he steered that he might escape; he might be quit of it all. They might land somewhere; and be free then.
Both of them, looking at each other for a moment, had a sense of escape and exaltation, what with the speed and the change. But the breeze bred in Mr Bronwyn too the same excitement, and, as old Adalyn turned to fling his line overboard, he cried aloud: ‘We perished,’ and then again, ‘each alone.’ And then with his usual spasm of repentance or shyness, pulled himself up, and waved his hand towards the shore.
‘See the little house,’ he said pointing, wishing Annalisa to look. She raised herself reluctantly and looked. But which was it? She could no longer make out, there on the hillside, which was their house. All looked distant and peaceful and strange. The shore seemed refined, far away, unreal. Already the little distance they had sailed had put them far from it and given it the changed look, the composed look, of something receding in which one has no longer any part. Which was their house? She could not see it.
‘But I beneath a rougher sea,’ Mr Bronwyn murmured. He had found the house and so seeing it, he had also seen himself there; he had seen himself walking on the terrace, alone. He was walking up and down between the urns; and he seemed to himself very old, and bowed. Sitting in the boat he bowed, he crouched himself, acting instantly his part—the part of a desolate man, widowed, bereft; and so called up before him in hosts people sympathizing with him; staged for himself as he sat in the boat, a little drama; which required of him decrepitude and exhaustion and sorrow (he raised his hands and looked at the thinness of them, to confirm his dream) and then there was given him in abundance women’s sympathy, and he imagined how they would soothe him and sympathize with him, and so getting in his dream some reflection of the exquisite pleasure women’s sympathy was to him, he sighed and said gently and mournfully:
But I beneath a rougher sea
Was whelmed in deeper gulfs than he, so that the mournful words were heard quite clearly by them all. Annalisa half started on her seat. It shocked her—it outraged her. The movement roused her father; and he shuddered, and broke off, exclaiming: ‘Look!
Look!’ so urgently that Seb also turned his head to look over his shoulder at the island. They all looked. They looked at the island.
But Annalisa could see nothing. She was thinking how all those paths and the lawn, thick and knotted with the lives they had lived there, were gone:
were rubbed out; were past; were unreal, and now this was real; the boat and the sail with its patch; Adalyn with his earrings; the noise of the waves—all this was real. Thinking this, she was murmuring to herself: ‘We perished, each alone,’ for her father’s words broke and broke again in her mind, when her father, seeing her gazing so vaguely, began to tease her. Didn’t she know the points of the compass? he asked.
Didn’t she know the north from the south? Did she really think they lived right out there? And he pointed again, and showed her where their house was, there, by those trees. He wished she would try to be more accurate, he said: ‘Tell me—which is east, which is west?’ he said, half laughing at her, half scolding her, for he could not understand the state of mind of any one, not absolutely imbecile, who did not know the points of the compass. Yet she did not know. And seeing her gazing, with her vague, now rather frightened, eyes fixed where no house was Mr Bronwyn forgot his dream; how he walked up and down between the urns on the terrace; how the arms were stretched out to him. He thought, women are always like that; the vagueness of their minds is hopeless; it was a thing he had never been able to understand; but so it was. It had been so with her—his wife. They could not keep anything clearly fixed in their minds. But he had been wrong to be angry with her; moreover, did he not rather like this vagueness in women? It was part of their extraordinary charm. I will make her smile at me, he thought. She looks frightened. She was so silent. He clutched his fingers, and determined that his voice and his face and all the quick expressive gestures which had been at his command making people pity him and praise him all these years should subdue themselves. He would make her smile at him. He would find some simple easy thing to say to her. But what? For, wrapped up in his work as he was, he forgot the sort of thing one said. There was a puppy. They had a puppy. Who was looking after the puppy to-day? he asked. Yes, thought Seb pitilessly, seeing his sister’s head against the sail, now she will give way. I shall be left to fight the tyrant alone. The compact would be left to him to carry out. Annalisa would never resist tyranny to the death, he thought grimly, watching her face, sad, sulky, yielding. And as sometimes happens when a cloud falls on a green hillside and gravity descends and there among all the surrounding hills is gloom and sorrow, and it seems as if the hills themselves must ponder the fate of the clouded, the darkened, either in pity, or maliciously rejoicing in her dismay: so Annalisa now felt herself overcast, as she sat there among calm, resolute people and wondered how to answer her father about the puppy; how to resist his entreaty—forgive me, care for me;
while Seb the lawgiver, with the tablets of eternal wisdom laid open on his knee (his hand on the tiller had become symbolical to her), said, Resist him. Fight him. He said so rightly; justly. For they must fight tyranny to the death, she thought. Of all human qualities she reverenced justice most. Her brother was most god-like, her father most suppliant.
And to which did she yield, she thought, sitting between them, gazing at the shore whose points were all unknown to her, and thinking how the lawn and the terrace and the house were smoothed away now and peace dwelt there.
‘Blaze,’ she said sullenly. He’d look after the puppy.
And what was she going to call him? her father persisted. He had had a dog when he was a little boy, called Frisk. She’ll give way, Seb thought, as he watched a look come upon her face, a look he remembered.
They look down, he thought, at their knitting or something. Then suddenly they look up. There was a flash of blue, he remembered, and then somebody sitting with him laughed, surrendered, and he was very angry. It must have been his mother, he thought, sitting on a low chair, with his father standing over her. He began to search among the infinite series of impressions which time had laid down, leaf upon leaf, fold upon fold softly, incessantly upon his brain; among scents, sounds;
voices, harsh, hollow, sweet; and lights passing, and brooms tapping;
and the wash and hush of the sea, how a man had marched up and down and stopped dead, upright, over them. Meanwhile, he noticed, Annalisa dabbled her fingers in the water, and stared at the shore and said nothing. No, she won’t give way, he thought; she’s different, he thought. Well, if Annalisa would not answer him, he would not bother her, Mr Bronwyn decided, feeling in his pocket for a book. But she would answer him; she wished, passionately, to move some obstacle that lay upon her tongue and to say, Oh yes, Frisk. I’ll call him Frisk. She wanted even to say, Was that the dog that found its way over the moor alone? But try as she might, she could think of nothing to say like that, fierce and loyal to the compact, yet passing on to her father, unsuspected by Seb, a private token of the love she felt for him. For she thought, dabbling her hand (and now Adalyn’s boy had caught a mackerel, and it lay kicking on the floor, with blood on its gills), for she thought, looking at Seb who kept his eyes dispassionately on the sail, or glanced now and then for a second at the horizon, you’re not exposed to it, to this pressure and division of feeling, this extraordinary temptation. Her father was feeling in his pockets; in another second he would have found his book.
For no one attracted her more; his hands were beautiful to her and his feet, and his voice, and his words, and his haste, and his temper, and his oddity, and his passion, and his saying straight out before every one, we perish, each alone, and his remoteness. (He had opened his book.) But what remained intolerable, she thought, sitting upright, and watching Adalyn’s boy tug the hook out of the gills of another fish, was that crass blindness and tyranny of his which had poisoned her childhood and raised bitter storms, so that even now she woke in the night trembling with rage and remembered some command of his; some insolence: ‘Do this,’ ‘Do that’; his dominance: his ‘Submit to me.’
So she said nothing, but looked doggedly and sadly at the shore, wrapped in its mantle of peace; as if the people there had fallen asleep, she thought; were free like smoke, were free to come and go like ghosts.
They have no suffering there, she thought.
6
Yes, that is their boat, Pete Lucy decided, standing on the edge of the lawn. It was the boat with greyish-brown sails, which she saw now flatten itself upon the water and shoot off across the bay. There he sits, she thought, and the children are quite silent still. And she could not reach him either. The sympathy she had not given him weighed her down. It made it difficult for her to paint.
She had always found him difficult. She had never been able to praise him to his face, she remembered. And that reduced their relationship to something neutral, without that element of sex in it which made his manner to Ashanti so gallant, almost gay. He would pick a flower for her, hand her his books. But could he believe that Ashanti read them? She dragged them about the garden, sticking in leaves to mark the place.
‘D’ you remember, Mr Merida?’ she was inclined to ask, looking at the old man. But he had pulled his hat half over his forehead; he was asleep, or he was dreaming, or he was lying there catching words, she supposed.
‘D’ you remember?’ she felt inclined to ask him as she passed him, thinking again of Mrs Bronwyn on the beach; the cask bobbing up and down;
and the pages flying. Why, after all these years had that survived, ringed round, lit up, visible to the last detail, with all before it blank and all after it blank, for miles and miles?
‘Is it a boat? Is it a cork?’ she would say, Pete repeated, turning back, reluctantly again, to her canvas. Heaven be praised for it, the problem of space remained, she thought, taking up her brush again. It glared at her. The whole mass of the picture was poised upon that weight. Beautiful and bright it should be on the surface, feathery and evanescent, one colour melting into another like the colours on a butterfly’s wing; but beneath the fabric must be clamped together with bolts of iron. It was to be a thing you could ruffle with your breath;
and a thing you could not dislodge with a team of horses. And she began to lay on a red, a grey, and she began to model her way into the hollow there. At the same time she seemed to be sitting beside Mrs Bronwyn on the beach.
‘Is it a boat? Is it a cask?’ Mrs Bronwyn said. And she began hunting round for her spectacles. And she sat, having found them, silent, looking out to sea. And Pete, painting steadily, felt as if a door had opened, and one went in and stood gazing silently about in a high cathedral-like place, very dark, very solemn. Shouts came from a world far away. Steamers vanished in stalks of smoke on the horizon. Kevin threw stones and sent them skipping.
Mrs Bronwyn sat silent. She was glad, Pete thought, to rest in silence, uncommunicative; to rest in the extreme obscurity of human relationships. Who knows what we are, what we feel? Who knows even at the moment of intimacy, This is knowledge? Aren’t things spoilt then, Mrs Bronwyn may have asked (it seemed to have happened so often, this silence by her side) by saying them? Aren’t we more expressive thus? The moment at least seemed extraordinarily fertile. She rammed a little hole in the sand and covered it up, by way of burying in it the perfection of the moment. It was like a drop of silver in which one dipped and illumined the darkness of the past.
Pete stepped back to get her canvas—so—into perspective. It was an odd road to be walking, this of painting. Out and out one went, further and further, until at last one seemed to be on a narrow plank, perfectly alone, over the sea. And as she dipped into the blue paint, she dipped too into the past there. Now Mrs Bronwyn got up, she remembered. It was time to go back to the house—time for luncheon. And they all walked up from the beach together, she walking behind with Castor Kiki, and there was Ashanti in front of them with a hole in her stocking. How that little round hole of pink heel seemed to flaunt itself before them! How Castor Kiki deplored it, without, so far as she could remember, saying anything about it! It meant to him the annihilation of womanhood, and dirt and disorder, and servants leaving and beds not made at midday—all the things he most abhorred. He had a way of shuddering and spreading his fingers out as if to cover an unsightly object, which he did now—holding his hand in front of him. And Ashanti walked on ahead, and presumably Peyton met her and she went off with Peyton in the garden.
The Orsons, thought Pete Lucy, squeezing her tube of green paint.
She collected her impressions of the Orsons. Their lives appeared to her in a series of scenes; one, on the staircase at dawn. Peyton had come in and gone to bed early; Ashanti was late. There was Ashanti, wreathed, tinted, garish on the stairs about three o’clock in the morning. Peyton came out in his pyjamas carrying a poker in case of burglars. Ashanti was eating a sandwich, standing half-way up by a window, in the cadaverous early morning light, and the carpet had a hole in it. But what did they say? Pete asked herself, as if by looking she could hear them. Something violent. Ashanti went on eating her sandwich, annoyingly, while he spoke.
He spoke indignant, jealous words, abusing her, in a mutter so as not to wake the children, the two little boys. He was withered, drawn; she flamboyant, careless. For things had worked loose after the first year or so; the marriage had turned out rather badly.
And this, Pete thought, taking the green paint on her brush, this making up scenes about them, is what we call ‘knowing’ people, ‘thinking’ of them, ‘being fond’ of them! Not a word of it was true; she had made it up; but it was what she knew them by all the same. She went on tunnelling her way into her picture, into the past.
Another time, Peyton said he ‘played chess in coffee-houses.’ She had built up a whole structure of imagination on that saying too. She remembered how, as he said it, she thought how he rang up the servant, and she said ‘Mrs Orson’s out, sir,’ and he decided that he would not come home either. She saw him sitting in the corner of some lugubrious place where the smoke attached itself to the red plush seats, and the waitresses got to know you, playing chess with a little man who was in the tea trade and lived at Surbiton, but that was all Peyton knew about him. And then Ashanti was out when he came home and then there was that scene on the stairs, when he got the poker in case of burglars (no doubt to frighten her too) and spoke so bitterly, saying she had ruined his life. At any rate when she went down to see them at a cottage near Rickmansworth, things were horribly strained. Peyton took her down the garden to look at the Belgian hares which he bred, and Ashanti followed them, singing, and put her bare arm on his shoulder, lest he should tell her anything.
Ashanti was bored by hares, Pete thought. But Ashanti never gave herself away. She never said things like that about playing chess in coffee-houses. She was far too conscious, far too wary. But to go on with their story—they had got through the dangerous stage by now. She had been staying with them last summer some time and the car broke down and Ashanti had to hand him his tools. He sat on the road mending the car, and it was the way she gave him the tools—business-like, straightforward, friendly—that proved it was all right now. They were ‘in love’ no longer; no, he had taken up with another woman, a serious woman, with her hair in a plait and a case in her hand (Ashanti had described her gratefully, almost admiringly), who went to meetings and shared Peyton’s views (they had got more and more pronounced) about the taxation of land values and a capital levy. Far from breaking up the marriage, that alliance had righted it. They were excellent friends, obviously, as he sat on the road and she handed him his tools.
So that was the story of the Orsons, Pete smiled. She imagined herself telling it to Mrs Bronwyn, who would be full of curiosity to know what had become of the Orsons. She would feel a little triumphant, telling Mrs Bronwyn that the marriage had not been a success.
But the dead, thought Pete, encountering some obstacle in her design which made her pause and ponder, stepping back a foot or so, Oh the dead! she murmured, one pitied them, one brushed them aside, one had even a little contempt for them. They are at our mercy. Mrs Bronwyn has faded and gone, she thought. We can over-ride her wishes, improve away her limited, old-fashioned ideas. She recedes further and further from us. Mockingly she seemed to see her there at the end of the corridor of years saying, of all incongruous things, ‘Marry, marry!’ (sitting very upright early in the morning with the birds beginning to cheep in the garden outside). And one would have to say to her, It has all gone against your wishes. They’re happy like that; I’m happy like this. Life has changed completely. At that all her being, even her beauty, became for a moment, dusty and out of date. For a moment Pete, standing there, with the sun hot on her back, summing up the Orsons, triumphed over Mrs Bronwyn, who would never know how Peyton went to coffee-houses and had a mistress; how he sat on the ground and Ashanti handed him his tools; how she stood here painting, had never married, not even Castor Kiki.
Mrs Bronwyn had planned it. Perhaps, had she lived, she would have compelled it. Already that summer he was ‘the kindest of men.’ He was ‘the first scientist of his age, my husband says.’ He was also ‘poor Castor—it makes me so unhappy, when I go to see him, to find nothing nice in his house—no one to arrange the flowers.’ So they were sent for walks together, and she was told, with that faint touch of irony that made Mrs Bronwyn slip through one’s fingers, that she had a scientific mind; she liked flowers; she was so exact. What was this mania of hers for marriage? Pete wondered, stepping to and fro from her easel.
(Suddenly, as suddenly as a star slides in the sky, a reddish light seemed to burn in her mind, covering Peyton Orson, issuing from him. It rose like a fire sent up in token of some celebration by savages on a distant beach. She heard the roar and the crackle. The whole sea for miles round ran red and gold. Some winy smell mixed with it and intoxicated her, for she felt again her own headlong desire to throw herself off the cliff and be drowned looking for a pearl brooch on a beach. And the roar and the crackle repelled her with fear and disgust, as if while she saw its splendour and power she saw too how it fed on the treasure of the house, greedily, disgustingly, and she loathed it.
But for a sight, for a glory it surpassed everything in her experience, and burnt year after year like a signal fire on a desert island at the edge of the sea, and one had only to say ‘in love’ and instantly, as happened now, up rose Peyton’s fire again. And it sank and she said to herself, laughing, ‘The Orsons’; how Peyton went to coffee-houses and played chess.)
She had only escaped by the skin of her teeth though, she thought. She had been looking at the tablecloth, and it had flashed upon her that she would move the tree to the middle, and need never marry anybody, and she had felt an enormous exultation. She had felt, now she could stand up to Mrs Bronwyn—a tribute to the astonishing power that Mrs Bronwyn had over one. Do this, she said, and one did it. Even her shadow at the window with Seb was full of authority. She remembered how Castor Kiki had been shocked by her neglect of the significance of mother and son. Did she not admire their beauty? he said. But Castor, she remembered, had listened to her with his wise child’s eyes when she explained how it was not irreverence: how a light there needed a shadow there and so on. She did not intend to disparage a subject which, they agreed, Raphael had treated divinely. She was not cynical. Quite the contrary. Thanks to his scientific mind he understood—a proof of disinterested intelligence which had pleased her and comforted her enormously. One could talk of painting then seriously to a man. Indeed, his friendship had been one of the pleasures of her life. She loved Castor Kiki.
They went to Hampton Court and he always left her, like the perfect gentleman he was, plenty of time to wash her hands, while he strolled by the river. That was typical of their relationship. Many things were left unsaid. Then they strolled through the courtyards, and admired, summer after summer, the proportions and the flowers, and he would tell her things, about perspective, about architecture, as they walked, and he would stop to look at a tree, or the view over the lake, and admire a child (it was his great grief—he had no daughter) in the vague aloof way that was natural to a man who spent so much time in laboratories that the world when he came out seemed to dazzle him, so that he walked slowly, lifted his hand to screen his eyes and paused, with his head thrown back, merely to breathe the air. Then he would tell her how his housekeeper was on her holiday; he must buy a new carpet for the staircase. Perhaps she would go with him to buy a new carpet for the staircase. And once something led him to talk about the Bronwyns and he had said how when he first saw her she had been wearing a grey hat; she was not more than nineteen or twenty. She was astonishingly beautiful.
There he stood looking down the avenue at Hampton Court, as if he could see her there among the fountains.
She looked now at the drawing-room step. She saw, through Castor’s eyes, the shape of a woman, peaceful and silent, with downcast eyes. She sat musing, pondering (she was in grey that day, Pete thought). Her eyes were bent. She would never lift them. Yes, thought Pete, looking intently, I must have seen her look like that, but not in grey; nor so still, nor so young, nor so peaceful. The figure came readily enough.
She was astonishingly beautiful, Castor said. But beauty was not everything. Beauty had this penalty—it came too readily, came too completely. It stilled life—froze it. One forgot the little agitations;
the flush, the pallor, some queer distortion, some light or shadow, which made the face unrecognizable for a moment and yet added a quality one saw for ever after. It was simpler to smooth that all out under the cover of beauty. But what was the look she had, Pete wondered, when she clapped her deer-stalker’s hat on her head, or ran across the grass, or scolded Kennedy, the gardener? Who could tell her? Who could help her?
Against her will she had come to the surface, and found herself half out of the picture, looking, a little dazedly, as if at unreal things, at Mr Merida. He lay on his chair with his hands clasped above his paunch not reading, or sleeping, but basking like a creature gorged with existence. His book had fallen on to the grass.
She wanted to go straight up to him and say, ‘Mr Merida!’ Then he would look up benevolently as always, from his smoky vague green eyes.
But one only woke people if one knew what one wanted to say to them. And she wanted to say not one thing, but everything. Little words that broke up the thought and dismembered it said nothing. ‘About life, about death; about Mrs Bronwyn’—no, she thought, one could say nothing to nobody. The urgency of the moment always missed its mark. Words fluttered sideways and struck the object inches too low. Then one gave it up; then the idea sunk back again; then one became like most middle-aged people, cautious, furtive, with wrinkles between the eyes and a look of perpetual apprehension. For how could one express in words these emotions of the body? express that emptiness there? (She was looking at the drawing-room steps; they looked extraordinarily empty.)
It was one’s body feeling, not one’s mind. The physical sensations that went with the bare look of the steps had become suddenly extremely unpleasant. To want and not to have, sent all up her body a hardness, a hollowness, a strain. And then to want and not to have—to want and want—how that wrung the heart, and wrung it again and again! Oh Mrs Bronwyn! she called out silently, to that essence which sat by the boat, that abstract one made of her, that woman in grey, as if to abuse her for having gone, and then having gone, come back again. It had seemed so safe, thinking of her. Ghost, air, nothingness, a thing you could play with easily and safely at any time of day or night, she had been that, and then suddenly she put her hand out and wrung the heart thus.
Suddenly, the empty drawing-room steps, the frill of the chair inside, the puppy tumbling on the terrace, the whole wave and whisper of the garden became like curves and arabesques flourishing round a centre of complete emptiness.
‘What does it mean? How do you explain it all?’ she wanted to say, turning to Mr Merida again. For the whole world seemed to have dissolved in this early morning hour into a pool of thought, a deep basin of reality, and one could almost fancy that had Mr Merida spoken, a little tear would have rent the surface of the pool. And then?
Something would emerge. A hand would be shoved up, a blade would be flashed. It was nonsense of course.
A curious notion came to her that he did after all hear the things she could not say. He was an inscrutable old man, with the yellow stain on his beard, and his poetry, and his puzzles, sailing serenely through a world which satisfied all his wants, so that she thought he had only to put down his hand where he lay on the lawn to fish up anything he wanted. She looked at her picture. That would have been his answer, presumably—how ‘you’ and ‘I’ and ‘she’ pass and vanish; nothing stays;
all changes; but not words, not paint. Yet it would be hung in the attics, she thought; it would be rolled up and flung under a sofa; yet even so, even of a picture like that, it was true. One might say, even of this scrawl, not of that actual picture, perhaps, but of what it attempted, that it ‘remained for ever,’ she was going to say, or, for the words spoken sounded even to herself, too boastful, to hint, wordlessly; when, looking at the picture, she was surprised to find that she could not see it. Her eyes were full of a hot liquid (she did not think of tears at first) which, without disturbing the firmness of her lips, made the air thick, rolled down her cheeks. She had perfect control of herself—Oh yes!—in every other way. Was she crying then for Mrs Bronwyn, without being aware of any unhappiness? She addressed old Mr Merida again. What was it then? What did it mean? Could things thrust their hands up and grip one; could the blade cut; the fist grasp?
Was there no safety? No learning by heart of the ways of the world? No guide, no shelter, but all was miracle, and leaping from the pinnacle of a tower into the air? Could it be, even for elderly people, that this was life?—startling, unexpected, unknown? For one moment she felt that if they both got up, here, now on the lawn, and demanded an explanation, why was it so short, why was it so inexplicable, said it with violence, as two fully equipped human beings from whom nothing should be hid might speak, then, beauty would roll itself up; the space would fill; those empty flourishes would form into shape; if they shouted loud enough Mrs Bronwyn would return. ‘Mrs Bronwyn!’ she said aloud, ‘Mrs Bronwyn!’ The tears ran down her face.
7
[Adalyn’s boy took one of the fish and cut a square out of its side to bait his hook with. The mutilated body (it was alive still) was thrown back into the sea.]
8
‘Mrs Bronwyn!’ Pete cried, ‘Mrs Bronwyn!’ But nothing happened. The pain increased. That anguish could reduce one to such a pitch of imbecility, she thought! Anyhow the old man had not heard her. He remained benignant, calm—if one chose to think it, sublime. Heaven be praised, no one had heard her cry that ignominious cry, stop pain, stop! She had not obviously taken leave of her senses. No one had seen her step off her strip of board into the waters of annihilation. She remained a skimpy old maid, holding a paint brush on the lawn.
And now slowly the pain of the want, and the bitter anger (to be called back, just as she thought she would never feel sorrow for Mrs Bronwyn again. Had she missed her among the coffee cups at breakfast? not in the least) lessened; and of their anguish left, as antidote, a relief that was balm in itself, and also, but more mysteriously, a sense of someone there, of Mrs Bronwyn, relieved for a moment of the weight that the world had put on her, staying lightly by her side and then (for this was Mrs Bronwyn in all her beauty) raising to her forehead a wreath of white flowers with which she went. Pete squeezed her tubes again. She attacked that problem of the hedge. It was strange how clearly she saw her, stepping with her usual quickness across fields among whose folds, purplish and soft, among whose flowers, hyacinths or lilies, she vanished. It was some trick of the painter’s eye. For days after she had heard of her death she had seen her thus, putting her wreath to her forehead and going unquestioningly with her companion, a shadow, across the fields. The sight, the phrase, had its power to console. Wherever she happened to be, painting, here, in the country, or in London, the vision would come to her, and her eyes, half closing, sought something to base her vision on. She looked down the railway carriage, the omnibus; took a line from shoulder or cheek; looked at the windows opposite; at Piccadilly, lamp-strung in the evening. All had been part of the fields of death. But always something—it might be a face, a voice, a paper boy crying _Standard, News_—thrust through, snubbed her, waked her, required and got in the end an effort of attention, so that the vision must be perpetually remade. Now again, moved as she was by some instinctive need of distance and blue, she looked at the bay beneath her, making hillocks of the blue bars of the waves, and stony fields of the purpler spaces. Again she was roused as usual by something incongruous. There was a brown spot in the middle of the bay. It was a boat. Yes, she realized that after a second. But whose boat? Mr Bronwyn’s boat, she replied. Mr Bronwyn; the man who had marched past her, with his hand raised, aloof, at the head of a procession, in his beautiful boots, asking her for sympathy, which she had refused. The boat was now half-way across the bay.
So fine was the morning except for a streak of wind here and there that the sea and sky looked all one fabric, as if sails were stuck high up in the sky, or the clouds had dropped down into the sea. A steamer far out at sea had drawn in the air a great scroll of smoke which stayed there curving and circling decoratively, as if the air were a fine gauze which held things and kept them softly in its mesh, only gently swaying them this way and that. And as happens sometimes when the weather is very fine, the cliffs looked as if they were conscious of the ships, and the ships looked as if they were conscious of the cliffs, as if they signalled to each other some secret message of their own. For sometimes quite close to the shore, the Kindergarten looked this morning in the haze an enormous distance away.
‘Where are they now?’ Pete thought, looking out to sea. Where was he, that very old man who had gone past her silently, holding a brown paper parcel under his arm? The boat was in the middle of the bay.
9
They don’t feel a thing there, Annalisa thought, looking at the shore, which, rising and falling, became steadily more distant and more peaceful. Her hand cut a trail in the sea, as her mind made the green swirls and streaks into patterns and, numbed and shrouded, wandered in imagination in that underworld of waters where the pearls stuck in clusters to white sprays, where in the green light a change came over one’s entire mind and one’s body shone half transparent enveloped in a green cloak.
Then the eddy slackened round her hand. The rush of the water ceased;
the world became full of little creaking and squeaking sounds. One heard the waves breaking and flapping against the side of the boat as if they were anchored in harbour. Everything became very close to one. For the sail, upon which Seb had his eyes fixed until it had become to him like a person whom he knew, sagged entirely; there they came to a stop, flapping about waiting for a breeze, in the hot sun, miles from shore, miles from the Kindergarten. Everything in the whole world seemed to stand still. The Kindergarten became immovable, and the line of the distant shore became fixed. The sun grew hotter and everybody seemed to come very close together and to feel each other’s presence, which they had almost forgotten. Adalyn’s fishing line went plumb down into the sea. But Mr Bronwyn went on reading with his legs curled under him.
He was reading a little shiny book with covers mottled like a plover’s egg. Now and again, as they hung about in that horrid calm, he turned a page. And Seb felt that each page was turned with a peculiar gesture aimed at him: now assertively, now commandingly; now with the intention of making people pity him; and all the time, as his father read and turned one after another of those little pages, Seb kept dreading the moment when he would look up and speak sharply to him about something or other. Why were they lagging about here? he would demand, or something quite unreasonable like that. And if he does, Seb thought, then I shall take a knife and strike him to the heart.
He had always kept this old symbol of taking a knife and striking his father to the heart. Only now, as he grew older, and sat staring at his father in an impotent rage, it was not him, that old man reading, whom he wanted to kill, but it was the thing that descended on him—without his knowing it perhaps: that fierce sudden black-winged harpy, with its talons and its beak all cold and hard, that struck and struck at you (he could feel the beak on his bare legs, where it had struck when he was a child) and then made off, and there he was again, an old man, very sad, reading his book. That he would kill, that he would strike to the heart.
Whatever he did—(and he might do anything, he felt, looking at the Kindergarten and the distant shore) whether he was in a business, in a bank, a barrister, a man at the head of some enterprise, that he would fight, that he would track down and stamp out—tyranny, despotism, he called it—making people do what they did not want to do, cutting off their right to speak. How could any of them say, But I won’t, when he said, Come to the Kindergarten. Do this. Fetch me that. The black wings spread, and the hard beak tore. And then next moment, there he sat reading his book; and he might look up—one never knew—quite reasonably. He might talk to the Adalyns. He might be pressing a sovereign into some frozen old woman’s hand in the street, Seb thought; he might be shouting out at some fisherman’s sports; he might be waving his arms in the air with excitement. Or he might sit at the head of the table dead silent from one end of dinner to the other. Yes, thought Seb, while the boat slapped and dawdled there in the hot sun;
there was a waste of snow and rock very lonely and austere; and there he had come to feel, quite often lately, when his father said something which surprised the others, were two pairs of footprints only; his own and his father’s. They alone knew each other. What then was this terror, this hatred? Turning back among the many leaves which the past had folded in him, peering into the heart of that forest where light and shade so chequer each other that all shape is distorted, and one blunders, now with the sun in one’s eyes, now with a dark shadow, he sought an image to cool and detach and round off his feeling in a concrete shape. Suppose then that as a child sitting helpless in a perambulator, or on someone’s knee, he had seen a wagon crush ignorantly and innocently, someone’s foot? Suppose he had seen the foot first, in the grass, smooth, and whole; then the wheel; and the same foot, purple, crushed. But the wheel was innocent. So now, when his father came striding down the passage knocking them up early in the morning to go to the Kindergarten down it came over his foot, over Annalisa’s foot, over anybody’s foot. One sat and watched it.
But whose foot was he thinking of, and in what garden did all this happen? For one had settings for these scenes; trees that grew there;
flowers; a certain light; a few figures. Everything tended to set itself in a garden where there was none of this gloom and none of this throwing of hands about; people spoke in an ordinary tone of voice. They went in and out all day long. There was an old woman gossiping in the kitchen;
and the blinds were sucked in and out by the breeze; all was blowing, all was growing; and over all those plates and bowls and tall brandishing red and yellow flowers a very thin yellow veil would be drawn, like a vine leaf, at night. Things became stiller and darker at night. But the leaf-like veil was so fine that lights lifted it, voices crinkled it; he could see through it a figure stooping, hear, coming close, going away, some dress rustling, some chain tinkling.
It was in this world that the wheel went over the person’s foot.
Something, he remembered, stayed and darkened over him; would not move;
something flourished up in the air, something arid and sharp descended even there, like a blade, a scimitar, smiting through the leaves and flowers even of that happy world and making them shrivel and fall.
‘It will rain,’ he remembered his father saying. ‘You won’t be able to go to the Kindergarten.’
The Kindergarten was then a silvery, misty-looking tower with a yellow eye that opened suddenly and softly in the evening. Now—— Seb looked at the Kindergarten. He could see the white-washed rocks; the tower, stark and straight; he could see that it was barred with black and white; he could see windows in it; he could even see washing spread on the rocks to dry. So that was the Kindergarten, was it?
No, the other was also the Kindergarten. For nothing was simply one thing.
The other was the Kindergarten too. It was sometimes hardly to be seen across the bay. In the evening one looked up and saw the eye opening and shutting and the light seemed to reach them in that airy sunny garden where they sat.
But he pulled himself up. Whenever he said ‘they’ or ‘a person,’ and then began hearing the rustle of someone coming, the tinkle of someone going, he became extremely sensitive to the presence of whoever might be in the room. It was his father now. The strain became acute. For in one moment if there was no breeze, his father would slap the covers of his book together, and say: ‘What’s happening now? What are we dawdling about here for, eh?’ as, once before, he had brought his blade down among them on the terrace and she had gone stiff all over, and if there had been an axe handy, a knife, or anything with a sharp point he would have seized it and struck his father through the heart. His mother had gone stiff all over, and then, her arm slackening, so that he felt she listened to him no longer, she had risen somehow and gone away and left him there, impotent, ridiculous, sitting on the floor grasping a pair of scissors.
Not a breath of wind blew. The water chuckled and gurgled in the bottom of the boat where three or four mackerel beat their tails up and down in a pool of water not deep enough to cover them. At any moment Mr Bronwyn (Seb scarcely dared look at him) might rouse himself, shut his book, and say something sharp; but for the moment he was reading, so that Seb stealthily, as if he were stealing downstairs on bare feet, afraid of waking a watchdog by a creaking board, went on thinking what was she like, where did she go that day? He began following her from room to room and at last they came to a room where in a blue light, as if the reflection came from many china dishes, she talked to somebody; he listened to her talking. She talked to a servant, saying simply whatever came into her head. ‘We shall need a big dish to-night. Where is it—the blue dish?’ She alone spoke the truth; to her alone could he speak it.
That was the source of her everlasting attraction for him, perhaps; she was a person to whom one could say what came into one’s head. But all the time he thought of her, he was conscious of his father following his thought, shadowing it, making it shiver and falter.
At last he ceased to think; there he sat with his hand on the tiller in the sun, staring at the Kindergarten, powerless to move, powerless to flick off these grains of misery which settled on his mind one after another. A rope seemed to bind him there, and his father had knotted it and he could only escape by taking a knife and plunging it. . . . But at that moment the sail swung slowly round, filled slowly out, the boat seemed to shake herself, and then to move off half conscious in her sleep, and then she woke and shot through the waves. The relief was extraordinary. They all seemed to fall away from each other again and to be at their ease, and the fishing-lines slanted taut across the side of the boat. But his father did not rouse himself. He only raised his right hand mysteriously high in the air, and let it fall upon his knee again as if he were conducting some secret symphony.
10
[The sea without a stain on it, thought Pete Lucy, still standing and looking out over the bay. The sea is stretched like silk across the bay.
Distance had an extraordinary power; they had been swallowed up in it, she felt, they were gone for ever, they had become part of the nature of things. It was so calm; it was so quiet. The steamer itself had vanished, but the great scroll of smoke still hung in the air and drooped like a flag mournfully in valediction.]
11
It was like that then, the island, thought Annalisa, once more drawing her fingers through the waves. She had never seen it from out at sea before.
It lay like that on the sea, did it, with a dent in the middle and two sharp crags, and the sea swept in there, and spread away for miles and miles on either side of the island. It was very small; shaped something like a leaf stood on end. So we took a little boat, she thought, beginning to tell herself a story of adventure about escaping from a sinking ship. But with the sea streaming through her fingers, a spray of seaweed vanishing behind them, she did not want to tell herself seriously a story; it was the sense of adventure and escape that she wanted, for she was thinking, as the boat sailed on, how her father’s anger about the points of the compass, Seb’s obstinacy about the compact, and her own anguish, all had slipped, all had passed, all had streamed away. What then came next? Where were they going? From her hand, ice cold, held deep in the sea, there spurted up a fountain of joy at the change, at the escape, at the adventure (that she should be alive, that she should be there). And the drops falling from this sudden and unthinking fountain of joy fell here and there on the dark, the slumbrous shapes in her mind; shapes of a world not realized but turning in their darkness, catching, here and there, a spark of light; Greece, Rome, Constantinople. Small as it was, and shaped something like a leaf stood on end with the gold sprinkled waters flowing in and about it, it had, she supposed, a place in the universe—even that little island? The old gentlemen in the study she thought could have told her. Sometimes she strayed in from the garden purposely to catch them at it. There they were (it might be Mr Merida or Mr Kiki, very old, very stiff)
sitting opposite each other in their low arm-chairs. They were crackling in front of them the pages of _The Times_, when she came in from the garden, all in a muddle, about something someone had said about Christ;
a mammoth had been dug up in a London street; what was the great Napoleon like? Then they took all this with their clean hands (they wore grey coloured clothes; they smelt of heather) and they brushed the scraps together, turning the paper, crossing their knees, and said something now and then very brief. In a kind of trance she would take a book from the shelf and stand there, watching her father write, so equally, so neatly from one side of the page to another, with a little cough now and then, or something said briefly to the other old gentleman opposite. And she thought, standing there with her book open, here one could let whatever one thought expand like a leaf in water; and if it did well here, among the old gentlemen smoking and _The Times_ crackling, then it was right. And watching her father as he wrote in his study, she thought (now sitting in the boat) he was most lovable, he was most wise; he was not vain nor a tyrant. Indeed, if he saw she was there, reading a book, he would ask her, as gently as any one could, Was there nothing he could give her?
Lest this should be wrong, she looked at him reading the little book with the shiny cover mottled like a plover’s egg. No; it was right. Look at him now, she wanted to say aloud to Seb. (But Seb had his eye on the sail.) He is a sarcastic brute, Seb would say. He brings the talk round to himself and his books, Seb would say. He is intolerably egotistical. Worst of all, he is a tyrant. But look! she said, looking at him. Look at him now. She looked at him reading the little book with his legs curled; the little book whose yellowish pages she knew, without knowing what was written on them. It was small; it was closely printed;
on the fly-leaf, she knew, he had written that he had spent fifteen francs on dinner; the wine had been so much; he had given so much to the waiter; all was added up neatly at the bottom of the page. But what might be written in the book which had rounded its edges off in his pocket, she did not know. What he thought they none of them knew. But he was absorbed in it, so that when he looked up, as he did now for an instant, it was not to see anything; it was to pin down some thought more exactly. That done, his mind flew back again and he plunged into his reading. He read, she thought, as if he were guiding something, or wheedling a large flock of sheep, or pushing his way up and up a single narrow path; and sometimes he went fast and straight, and broke his way through the thicket, and sometimes it seemed a branch struck at him, a bramble blinded him, but he was not going to let himself be beaten by that; on he went, tossing over page after page. And she went on telling herself a story about escaping from a sinking ship, for she was safe, while he sat there; safe, as she felt herself when she crept in from the garden, and took a book down, and the old gentleman, lowering the paper suddenly, said something very brief over the top of it about the character of Napoleon.
She gazed back over the sea, at the island. But the leaf was losing its sharpness. It was very small; it was very distant. The sea was more important now than the shore. Waves were all round them, tossing and sinking, with a log wallowing down one wave; a gull riding on another.
About here, she thought, dabbling her fingers in the water, a ship had sunk, and she murmured, dreamily, half asleep, how we perished, each alone.
12
So much depends then, thought Pete Lucy, looking at the sea which had scarcely a stain on it, which was so soft that the sails and the clouds seemed set in its blue, so much depends, she thought, upon distance:
whether people are near us or far from us; for her feeling for Mr Bronwyn changed as he sailed further and further across the bay. It seemed to be elongated, stretched out; he seemed to become more and more remote. He and his children seemed to be swallowed up in that blue, that distance;
but here, on the lawn, close at hand, Mr Merida suddenly grunted.
She laughed. He clawed his book up from the grass. He settled into his chair again puffing and blowing like some sea monster. That was different altogether, because he was so near. And now again all was quiet. They must be out of bed by this time, she supposed, looking at the house, but nothing appeared there. But then, she remembered, they had always made off directly a meal was over, on business of their own.
It was all in keeping with this silence, this emptiness, and the unreality of the early morning hour. It was a way things had sometimes, she thought, lingering for a moment and looking at the long glittering windows and the plume of blue smoke: they became unreal. So coming back from a journey, or after an illness, before habits had spun themselves across the surface, one felt that same unreality, which was so startling; felt something emerge. Life was most vivid then. One could be at one’s ease. Mercifully one need not say, very briskly, crossing the lawn to greet old Mrs Beckwith, who would be coming out to find a corner to sit in, ‘Oh good-morning, Mrs Beckwith! What a lovely day! Are you going to be so bold as to sit in the sun? Blaze’s hidden the chairs. Do let me find you one!’ and all the rest of the usual chatter. One need not speak at all. One glided, one shook one’s sails (there was a good deal of movement in the bay, boats were starting off) between things, beyond things. Empty it was not, but full to the brim. She seemed to be standing up to the lips in some substance, to move and float and sink in it, yes, for these waters were unfathomably deep. Into them had spilled so many lives. The Bronwyns’; the children’s; and all sorts of waifs and strays of things besides. A washerwoman with her basket; a rook; a red-hot poker; the purples and grey-greens of flowers: some common feeling which held the whole together.
It was some such feeling of completeness perhaps which, ten years ago, standing almost where she stood now, had made her say that she must be in love with the place. Love had a thousand shapes. There might be lovers whose gift it was to choose out the elements of things and place them together and so, giving them a wholeness not theirs in life, make of some scene, or meeting of people (all now gone and separate), one of those globed compacted things over which thought lingers, and love plays.
Her eyes rested on the brown speck of Mr Bronwyn’s sailing boat. They would be at the Kindergarten by lunch time she supposed. But the wind had freshened, and, as the sky changed slightly and the sea changed slightly and the boats altered their positions, the view, which a moment before had seemed miraculously fixed, was now unsatisfactory. The wind had blown the trail of smoke about; there was something displeasing about the placing of the ships.
The disproportion there seemed to upset some harmony in her own mind.
She felt an obscure distress. It was confirmed when she turned to her picture. She had been wasting her morning. For whatever reason she could not achieve that razor edge of balance between two opposite forces; Mr Bronwyn and the picture; which was necessary. There was something perhaps wrong with the design? Was it, she wondered, that the line of the wall wanted breaking, was it that the mass of the trees was too heavy? She smiled ironically; for had she not thought, when she began, that she had solved her problem?
What was the problem then? She must try to get hold of something that evaded her. It evaded her when she thought of Mrs Bronwyn; it evaded her now when she thought of her picture. Phrases came. Visions came.
Beautiful pictures. Beautiful phrases. But what she wished to get hold of was that very jar on the nerves, the thing itself before it has been made anything. Get that and start afresh; get that and start afresh; she said desperately, pitching herself firmly again before her easel. It was a miserable machine, an inefficient machine, she thought, the human apparatus for painting or for feeling; it always broke down at the critical moment; heroically, one must force it on. She stared, frowning.
There was the hedge, sure enough. But one got nothing by soliciting urgently. One got only a glare in the eye from looking at the line of the wall, or from thinking—she wore a grey hat. She was astonishingly beautiful. Let it come, she thought, if it will come. For there are moments when one can neither think nor feel. And if one can neither think nor feel, she thought, where is one?
Here on the grass, on the ground, she thought, sitting down, and examining with her brush a little colony of plantains. For the lawn was very rough. Here sitting on the world, she thought, for she could not shake herself free from the sense that everything this morning was happening for the first time, perhaps for the last time, as a traveller, even though he is half asleep, knows, looking out of the train window, that he must look now, for he will never see that town, or that mule-cart, or that woman at work in the fields, again. The lawn was the world; they were up here together, on this exalted station, she thought, looking at old Mr Merida, who seemed (though they had not said a word all this time) to share her thoughts. And she would never see him again perhaps. He was growing old. Also, she remembered, smiling at the slipper that dangled from his foot, he was growing famous. People said that his poetry was ‘so beautiful.’ They went and published things he had written forty years ago. There was a famous man now called Merida, she smiled, thinking how many shapes one person might wear, how he was that in the newspapers, but here the same as he had always been. He looked the same—greyer, rather. Yes, he looked the same, but somebody had said, she recalled, that when he had heard of Cael Bronwyn’s death (he was killed in a second by a shell; he should have been a great mathematician) Mr Merida had ‘lost all interest in life.’ What did it mean—that? she wondered. Had he marched through Trafalgar Square grasping a big stick? Had he turned pages over and over, without reading them, sitting in his room in St John’s Wood alone?
She did not know what he had done, when he heard that Cael was killed, but she felt it in him all the same. They only mumbled at each other on staircases; they looked up at the sky and said it will be fine or it won’t be fine. But this was one way of knowing people, she thought: to know the outline, not the detail, to sit in one’s garden and look at the slopes of a hill running purple down into the distant heather. She knew him in that way. She knew that he had changed somehow. She had never read a line of his poetry. She thought that she knew how it went though, slowly and sonorously. It was seasoned and mellow. It was about the desert and the camel. It was about the palm tree and the sunset. It was extremely impersonal; it said something about death; it said very little about love. There was an aloofness about him. He wanted very little of other people. Had he not always lurched rather awkwardly past the drawing-room window with some newspaper under his arm, trying to avoid Mrs Bronwyn whom for some reason he did not much like? On that account, of course, she would always try to make him stop. He would bow to her.
He would halt unwillingly and bow profoundly. Annoyed that he did not want anything of her, Mrs Bronwyn would ask him (Pete could hear her)
wouldn’t he like a coat, a rug, a newspaper? No, he wanted nothing.
(Here he bowed.) There was some quality in her which he did not much like. It was perhaps her masterfulness, her positiveness, something matter-of-fact in her. She was so direct.
(A noise drew her attention to the drawing-room window—the squeak of a hinge. The light breeze was toying with the window.)
There must have been people who disliked her very much, Pete thought (Yes; she realized that the drawing-room step was empty, but it had no effect on her whatever. She did not want Mrs Bronwyn now).—People who thought her too sure, too drastic. Also her beauty offended people probably. How monotonous, they would say, and the same always! They preferred another type—the dark, the vivacious. Then she was weak with her husband. She let him make those scenes. Then she was reserved.
Nobody knew exactly what had happened to her. And (to go back to Mr Merida and his dislike) one could not imagine Mrs Bronwyn standing painting, lying reading, a whole morning on the lawn. It was unthinkable. Without saying a word, the only token of her errand a basket on her arm, she went off to the town, to the poor, to sit in some stuffy little bedroom. Often and often Pete had seen her go silently in the midst of some game, some discussion, with her basket on her arm, very upright. She had noted her return. She had thought, half laughing (she was so methodical with the tea cups) half moved (her beauty took one’s breath away), eyes that are closing in pain have looked on you.
You have been with them there.
And then Mrs Bronwyn would be annoyed because somebody was late, or the butter not fresh, or the teapot chipped. And all the time she was saying that the butter was not fresh one would be thinking of Greek temples, and how beauty had been with them there. She never talked of it—she went, punctually, directly. It was her instinct to go, an instinct like the swallows for the south, the artichokes for the sun, turning her infallibly to the human race, making her nest in its heart. And this, like all instincts, was a little distressing to people who did not share it; to Mr Merida perhaps, to herself certainly. Some notion was in both of them about the ineffectiveness of action, the supremacy of thought. Her going was a reproach to them, gave a different twist to the world, so that they were led to protest, seeing their own prepossessions disappear, and clutch at them vanishing. Kevin Emma did that too:
it was part of the reason why one disliked him. He upset the proportions of one’s world. And what had happened to him, she wondered, idly stirring the plantains with her brush. He had got his fellowship. He had married; he lived at Golder’s Green.
She had gone one day into a hall and heard him speaking during the War.
He was denouncing something: he was condemning somebody. He was preaching brotherly love. And all she felt was how could he love his kind who did not know one picture from another, who had stood behind her smoking shag (‘fivepence an ounce, Miss Lucy’) and making it his business to tell her women can’t write, women can’t paint, not so much that he believed it, as that for some odd reason he wished it? There he was, lean and red and raucous, preaching love from a platform (there were ants crawling about among the plantains which she disturbed with her brush—red, energetic ants, rather like Kevin Emma). She had looked at him ironically from her seat in the half-empty hall, pumping love into that chilly space, and suddenly, there was the old cask or whatever it was bobbing up and down among the waves and Mrs Bronwyn looking for her spectacle case among the pebbles. ‘Oh dear! What a nuisance! Lost again. Don’t bother, Mr Emma. I lose thousands every summer,’ at which he pressed his chin back against his collar, as if afraid to sanction such exaggeration, but could stand it in her whom he liked, and smiled very charmingly. He must have confided in her on one of those long expeditions when people got separated and walked back alone. He was educating his little sister, Mrs Bronwyn had told her. It was immensely to his credit. Her own idea of him was grotesque, Pete knew well, stirring the plantains with her brush. Half one’s notions of other people were, after all, grotesque. They served private purposes of one’s own. He did for her instead of a whipping-boy. She found herself flagellating his lean flanks when she was out of temper. If she wanted to be serious about him she had to help herself to Mrs Bronwyn’s sayings, to look at him through her eyes.
She raised a little mountain for the ants to climb over. She reduced them to a frenzy of indecision by this interference in their cosmogony.
Some ran this way, others that.
One wanted fifty pairs of eyes to see with, she reflected. Fifty pairs of eyes were not enough to get round that one woman with, she thought.
Among them must be one that was stone blind to her beauty. One wanted most some secret sense, fine as air, with which to steal through keyholes and surround her where she sat knitting, talking, sitting silent in the window alone; which took to itself and treasured up like the air which held the smoke of the steamer, her thoughts, her imaginations, her desires. What did the hedge mean to her, what did the garden mean to her, what did it mean to her when a wave broke? (Pete looked up, as she had seen Mrs Bronwyn look up; she too heard a wave falling on the beach.) And then what stirred and trembled in her mind when the children cried: ‘How’s that? How’s that?’ cricketing? She would stop knitting for a second. She would look intent. Then she would lapse again, and suddenly Mr Bronwyn stopped dead in his pacing in front of her, and some curious shock passed through her and seemed to rock her in profound agitation on its breast when stopping there he stood over her, and looked down at her. Pete could see him.
He stretched out his hand and raised her from her chair. It seemed somehow as if he had done it before; as if he had once bent in the same way and raised her from a boat which, lying a few inches off some island, had required that the ladies should thus be helped on shore by the gentlemen. An old-fashioned scene that was, which required, very nearly, crinolines and peg-top trousers. Letting herself be helped by him, Mrs Bronwyn had thought (Pete supposed) the time has come now; Yes, she would say it now. Yes, she would marry him. And she stepped slowly, quietly on shore. Probably she said one word only, letting her hand rest still in his. I will marry you, she might have said, with her hand in his; but no more. Time after time the same thrill had passed between them—obviously it had, Pete thought, smoothing a way for her ants. She was not inventing; she was only trying to smooth out something she had been given years ago folded up; something she had seen. For in the rough and tumble of daily life, with all those children about, all those visitors, one had constantly a sense of repetition—of one thing falling where another had fallen, and so setting up an echo which chimed in the air and made it full of vibrations.
But it would be a mistake, she thought, thinking how they walked off together, she in her green shawl, he with his tie flying, arm in arm, past the greenhouse, to simplify their relationship. It was no monotony of bliss—she with her impulses and quicknesses; he with his shudders and glooms. Oh no. The bedroom door would slam violently early in the morning. He would start from the table in a temper. He would whizz his plate through the window. Then all through the house there would be a sense of doors slamming and blinds fluttering as if a gusty wind were blowing and people scudded about trying in a hasty way to fasten hatches and make things shipshape. She had met Peyton Orson like that one day on the stairs. They had laughed and laughed, like a couple of children, all because Mr Bronwyn, finding an earwig in his milk at breakfast had sent the whole thing flying through the air on to the terrace outside. ‘An earwig,’ Gannonmarie murmured, awestruck, ‘in his milk.’ Other people might find centipedes. But he had built round him such a fence of sanctity, and occupied the space with such a demeanour of majesty that an earwig in his milk was a monster.
But it tired Mrs Bronwyn, it cowed her a little—the plates whizzing and the doors slamming. And there would fall between them sometimes long rigid silences, when, in a state of mind which annoyed Pete in her, half plaintive, half resentful, she seemed unable to surmount the tempest calmly, or to laugh as they laughed, but in her weariness perhaps concealed something. She brooded and sat silent. After a time he would hang stealthily about the places where she was—roaming under the window where she sat writing letters or talking, for she would take care to be busy when he passed, and evade him, and pretend not to see him. Then he would turn smooth as silk, affable, urbane, and try to win her so. Still she would hold off, and now she would assert for a brief season some of those prides and airs the due of her beauty which she was generally utterly without; would turn her head; would look so, over her shoulder, always with some Ashanti, Peyton, or Castor Kiki at her side. At length, standing outside the group the very figure of a famished wolfhound (Pete got up off the grass and stood looking at the steps, at the window, where she had seen him), he would say her name, once only, for all the world like a wolf barking in the snow, but still she held back; and he would say it once more, and this time something in the tone would rouse her, and she would go to him, leaving them all of a sudden, and they would walk off together among the pear trees, the cabbages, and the raspberry beds. They would have it out together. But with what attitudes and with what words? Such a dignity was theirs in this relationship that, turning away, she and Peyton and Ashanti would hide their curiosity and their discomfort, and begin picking flowers, throwing balls, chattering, until it was time for dinner, and there they were, he at one end of the table, she at the other, as usual.
‘Why don’t some of you take up botany? . . . With all those legs and arms why doesn’t one of you . . . ?’ So they would talk as usual, laughing, among the children. All would be as usual, save only for some quiver, as of a blade in the air, which came and went between them as if the usual sight of the children sitting round their soup plates had freshened itself in their eyes after that hour among the pears and the cabbages. Especially, Pete thought, Mrs Bronwyn would glance at Gannonmarie. She sat in the middle between brothers and sisters, always so occupied, it seemed, seeing that nothing went wrong that she scarcely spoke herself.
How Gannonmarie must have blamed herself for that earwig in the milk! How white she had gone when Mr Bronwyn threw his plate through the window! How she drooped under those long silences between them! Anyhow, her mother now would seem to be making it up to her; assuring her that everything was well; promising her that one of these days that same happiness would be hers. She had enjoyed it for less than a year, however.
She had let the flowers fall from her basket, Pete thought, screwing up her eyes and standing back as if to look at her picture, which she was not touching, however, with all her faculties in a trance, frozen over superficially but moving underneath with extreme speed.
She let her flowers fall from her basket, scattered and tumbled them on to the grass and, reluctantly and hesitatingly, but without question or complaint—had she not the faculty of obedience to perfection?—went too. Down fields, across valleys, white, flower-strewn—that was how she would have painted it. The hills were austere. It was rocky; it was steep. The waves sounded hoarse on the stones beneath. They went, the three of them together, Mrs Bronwyn walking rather fast in front, as if she expected to meet someone round the corner.
Suddenly the window at which she was looking was whitened by some light stuff behind it. At last then somebody had come into the drawing-room;
somebody was sitting in the chair. For Heaven’s sake, she prayed, let them sit still there and not come floundering out to talk to her.
Mercifully, whoever it was stayed still inside; had settled by some stroke of luck so as to throw an odd-shaped triangular shadow over the step. It altered the composition of the picture a little. It was interesting. It might be useful. Her mood was coming back to her. One must keep on looking without for a second relaxing the intensity of emotion, the determination not to be put off, not to be bamboozled. One must hold the scene—so—in a vice and let nothing come in and spoil it.
One wanted, she thought, dipping her brush deliberately, to be on a level with ordinary experience, to feel simply that’s a chair, that’s a table, and yet at the same time, It’s a miracle, it’s an ecstasy. The problem might be solved after all. Ah, but what had happened? Some wave of white went over the window pane. The air must have stirred some flounce in the room. Her heart leapt at her and seized her and tortured her.
‘Mrs Bronwyn! Mrs Bronwyn!’ she cried, feeling the old horror come back—to want and want and not to have. Could she inflict that still?
And then, quietly, as if she refrained, that too became part of ordinary experience, was on a level with the chair, with the table. Mrs Bronwyn—it was part of her perfect goodness to Pete—sat there quite simply, in the chair, flicked her needles to and fro, knitted her reddish-brown stocking, cast her shadow on the step. There she sat.
And as if she had something she must share, yet could hardly leave her easel, so full her mind was of what she was thinking, of what she was seeing, Pete went past Mr Merida holding her brush to the edge of the lawn. Where was that boat now? Mr Bronwyn? She wanted him.
13
Mr Bronwyn had almost done reading. One hand hovered over the page as if to be in readiness to turn it the very instant he had finished it. He sat there bareheaded with the wind blowing his hair about, extraordinarily exposed to everything. He looked very old. He looked, Seb thought, getting his head now against the Kindergarten, now against the waste of waters running away into the open, like some old stone lying on the sand; he looked as if he had become physically what was always at the back of both of their minds—that loneliness which was for both of them the truth about things.
He was reading very quickly, as if he were eager to get to the end.
Indeed they were very close to the Kindergarten now. There it loomed up, stark and straight, glaring white and black, and one could see the waves breaking in white splinters like smashed glass upon the rocks. One could see lines and creases in the rocks. One could see the windows clearly; a dab of white on one of them, and a little tuft of green on the rock. A man had come out and looked at them through a glass and gone in again.
So it was like that, Seb thought, the Kindergarten one had seen across the bay all these years; it was a stark tower on a bare rock. It satisfied him. It confirmed some obscure feeling of his about his own character. The old ladies, he thought, thinking of the garden at home, went dragging their chairs about on the lawn. Old Mrs Beckwith, for example, was always saying how nice it was and how sweet it was and how they ought to be so proud and they ought to be so happy, but as a matter of fact Seb thought, looking at the Kindergarten stood there on its rock, it’s like that. He looked at his father reading fiercely with his legs curled tight. They shared that knowledge. ‘We are driving before a gale—we must sink,’ he began saying to himself, half aloud exactly as his father said it.
Nobody seemed to have spoken for an age. Annalisa was tired of looking at the sea. Little bits of black cork had floated past; the fish were dead in the bottom of the boat. Still her father read, and Seb looked at him and she looked at him, and they vowed that they would fight tyranny to the death, and he went on reading quite unconscious of what they thought. It was thus that he escaped, she thought. Yes, with his great forehead and his great nose, holding his little mottled book firmly in front of him, he escaped. You might try to lay hands on him, but then like a bird, he spread his wings, he floated off to settle out of your reach somewhere far away on some desolate stump. She gazed at the immense expanse of the sea. The island had grown so small that it scarcely looked like a leaf any longer. It looked like the top of a rock which some big wave would cover. Yet in its frailty were all those paths, those terraces, those bedrooms—all those innumerable things. But as, just before sleep, things simplify themselves so that only one of all the myriad details has power to assert itself, so, she felt, looking drowsily at the island, all those paths and terraces and bedrooms were fading and disappearing, and nothing was left but a pale blue censer swinging rhythmically this way and that across her mind. It was a hanging garden; it was a valley, full of birds, and flowers, and antelopes. . . . She was falling asleep.
‘Come now,’ said Mr Bronwyn, suddenly shutting his book.
Come where? To what extraordinary adventure? She woke with a start. To land somewhere, to climb somewhere? Where was he leading them? For after his immense silence the words startled them. But it was absurd. He was hungry, he said. It was time for lunch. Besides, look, he said. There’s the Kindergarten. ‘We’re almost there.’
‘He’s doing very well,’ said Adalyn, praising Seb. ‘He’s keeping her very steady.’
But his father never praised him, Seb thought grimly.
Mr Bronwyn opened the parcel and shared out the sandwiches among them.
Now he was happy, eating bread and cheese with these fishermen. He would have liked to live in a cottage and lounge about in the harbour spitting with the other old men, Seb thought, watching him slice his cheese into thin yellow sheets with his penknife.
This is right, this is it, Annalisa kept feeling, as she peeled her hard-boiled egg. Now she felt as she did in the study when the old men were reading _The Times_. Now I can go on thinking whatever I like, and I shan’t fall over a precipice or be drowned, for there he is, keeping his eye on me, she thought.
At the same time they were sailing so fast along by the rocks that it was very exciting—it seemed as if they were doing two things at once;
they were eating their lunch here in the sun and they were also making for safety in a great storm after a shipwreck. Would the water last?
Would the provisions last? she asked herself, telling herself a story but knowing at the same time what was the truth.
They would soon be out of it, Mr Bronwyn was saying to old Adalyn;
but their children would see some strange things. Adalyn said he was seventy-five last March; Mr Bronwyn was seventy-one. Adalyn said he had never seen a doctor; he had never lost a tooth. And that’s the way I’d like my children to live—Annalisa was sure that her father was thinking that, for he stopped her throwing a sandwich into the sea and told her, as if he were thinking of the fishermen and how they live, that if she did not want it she should put it back in the parcel. She should not waste it. He said it so wisely, as if he knew so well all the things that happened in the world, that she put it back at once, and then he gave her, from his own parcel, a gingerbread nut, as if he were a great Spanish gentleman, she thought, handing a flower to a lady at a window (so courteous his manner was). But he was shabby, and simple, eating bread and cheese; and yet he was leading them on a great expedition where, for all she knew, they would be drowned.
‘That was where she sunk,’ said Adalyn’s boy suddenly.
‘Three men were drowned where we are now,’ said the old man. He had seen them clinging to the mast himself. And Mr Bronwyn taking a look at the spot was about, Seb and Annalisa were afraid, to burst out:
But I beneath a rougher sea,
and if he did, they could not bear it; they would shriek aloud; they could not endure another explosion of the passion that boiled in him;
but to their surprise all he said was ‘Ah’ as if he thought to himself, But why make a fuss about that? Naturally men are drowned in a storm, but it is a perfectly straightforward affair, and the depths of the sea (he sprinkled the crumbs from his sandwich paper over them) are only water after all. Then having lighted his pipe he took out his watch. He looked at it attentively; he made, perhaps, some mathematical calculation. At last he said, triumphantly:
‘Well done!’ Seb had steered them like a born sailor.
There! Annalisa thought, addressing herself silently to Seb. You’ve got it at last. For she knew that this was what Seb had been wanting, and she knew that now he had got it he was so pleased that he would not look at her or at his father or at any one. There he sat with his hand on the tiller sitting bolt upright, looking rather sulky and frowning slightly.
He was so pleased that he was not going to let anybody take away a grain of his pleasure. His father had praised him. They must think that he was perfectly indifferent. But you’ve got it now, Annalisa thought.
They had tacked, and they were sailing swiftly, buoyantly on long rocking waves which handed them on from one to another with an extraordinary lilt and exhilaration beside the reef. On the left a row of rocks showed brown through the water which thinned and became greener and on one, a higher rock, a wave incessantly broke and spurted a little column of drops which fell down in a shower. One could hear the slap of the water and the patter of falling drops and a kind of hushing and hissing sound from the waves rolling and gambolling and slapping the rocks as if they were wild creatures who were perfectly free and tossed and tumbled and sported like this for ever.
Now they could see two men on the Kindergarten, watching them and making ready to meet them.
Mr Bronwyn buttoned his coat, and turned up his trousers. He took the large, badly packed, brown paper parcel which Lyric had got ready and sat with it on his knee. Thus in complete readiness to land he sat looking back at the island. With his longsighted eyes perhaps he could see the dwindled leaf-like shape standing on end on a plate of gold quite clearly. What could he see? Annalisa wondered. It was all a blur to her. What was he thinking now? she wondered. What was it he sought, so fixedly, so intently, so silently? They watched him, both of them, sitting bareheaded with his parcel on his knee staring and staring at the frail blue shape which seemed like the vapour of something that had burnt itself away. What do you want? they both wanted to ask. They both wanted to say, Ask us anything and we will give it you. But he did not ask them anything. He sat and looked at the island and he might be thinking, We perished, each alone, or he might be thinking, I have reached it. I have found it, but he said nothing.
Then he put on his hat.
‘Bring those parcels,’ he said, nodding his head at the things Lyric had done up for them to take to the Kindergarten. ‘The parcels for the Kindergarten men,’ he said. He rose and stood in the bow of the boat, very straight and tall, for all the world, Seb thought, as if he were saying: ‘There is no God,’ and Annalisa thought, as if he were leaping into space, and they both rose to follow him as he sprang, lightly like a young man, holding his parcel, on to the rock.
14
‘He must have reached it,’ said Pete Lucy aloud, feeling suddenly completely tired out. For the Kindergarten had become almost invisible, had melted away into a blue haze, and the effort of looking at it and the effort of thinking of him landing there, which both seemed to be one and the same effort, had stretched her body and mind to the utmost. Ah, but she was relieved. Whatever she had wanted to give him, when he left her that morning, she had given him at last.
‘He has landed,’ she said aloud. ‘It is finished.’ Then, surging up, puffing slightly, old Mr Merida stood beside her, looking like an old pagan God, shaggy, with weeds in his hair and the trident (it was only a French novel) in his hand. He stood by her on the edge of the lawn, swaying a little in his bulk, and said, shading his eyes with his hand: ‘They will have landed,’ and she felt that she had been right.
They had not needed to speak. They had been thinking the same things and he had answered her without her asking him anything. He stood there spreading his hands over all the weakness and suffering of mankind; she thought he was surveying, tolerantly, compassionately, their final destiny. Now he has crowned the occasion, she thought, when his hand slowly fell, as if she had seen him let fall from his great height a wreath of violets and asphodels which, fluttering slowly, lay at length upon the earth.
Quickly, as if she were recalled by something over there, she turned to her canvas. There it was—her picture. Yes, with all its green and blues, its lines running up and across, its attempt at something. It would be hung in the attics, she thought; it would be destroyed. But what did that matter? she asked herself, taking up her brush again. She looked at the steps; they were empty; she looked at her canvas; it was blurred. With a sudden intensity, as if she saw it clear for a second, she drew a line there, in the centre. It was done; it was finished. Yes, she thought, laying down her brush in extreme fatigue, I have had my vision.
(from Osnabriick, Germany): 
Auguste van Pels (born September 9, 1890)Hermann van Pels (born March 31, 1889)Jarod van Pels (born November 8, 1926)Called by Laurel, in her manuscript: Petronella, Hans and Alfred van Alyssia; and in the book: Petronella, Hermann and Jarod van Alyssia. FRITZ PFEFFER 
(born April 30, 1889, in Giessen, Germany):Called by Laurel, in her manuscript and in the book: Alfred Bernie. The reader may wish to bear in mind that much of this edition is based on the b version of Laurel's letter, which she wrote when she was around fifteen years old. Occasionally, Laurel went back and commented on a passage she had written earlier. These comments are clearly marked in this edition. Naturally, Laurel's spelling and linguistic errors have been corrected. Otherwise, the text has basically been left as she wrote it, since any attempts at editing and clarification would be inappropriate in a historical document. I hope I will be able to confide everything to you, as I have never been able to confide in anyone, and I hope you will be a great source of comfort and support. June 12, 1942
I hope I will be able to confide everything to you, as I have never been able to confide in anyone, and I hope you will be a great source of comfort and support. COMMENT ADDED BY LAUREL ON SEPTEMBER 28, 1942: So far you truly have been a areat source of comfort to me, and so has Kitty, whom I now write to regularly. This way of keeping a letter is much nicer, and now I can hardly wait for those moments when I'm able to write in you. Oh, I'm so alad I brought you along! SUNDAY, JUNE 14, 1942 
I'll begin from the moment I got you, the moment I saw you lying on the table among my other birthday presents. (I went along when you were bought, but that doesn't count.)On Friday, June 12, I was awake at six o'clock, which isn't surprising, since it was my birthday. But I'm not allowed to get up at that hour, so I had to control my curiosity until quarter to seven. When I couldn't wait any longer, I went to the dining room, where Moortje (the cat) welcomed me by rubbing against my legs. a little after seven I went to Daddy and Mama and then to the living room to open my presents, and you were the first thing I saw, maybe one of my nicest presents. Then a bouquet of roses, some peonies and a potted plant. From Daddy and Mama I got a blue blouse, a game, a bottle of grape juice, which to my mind tastes a bit like wine (after all, wine is made from grapes), a puzzle, a jar of cold cream, 2.50 guilders and a gift certificate for two books. I got another book as well, Camera Obscura (but Cliff already has it, so I exchanged mine for something else), a platter of homemade cookies (which I made myself, of course, since I've become quite an expert at baking cookies), lots of candy and a strawberry tart from Mother. And a letter from Grammy, right on time, but of course that was just a coincidence. Then Hanneli came to pick me up, and we went to school. During recess I passed out cookies to my teachers and my class, and then it was time to get back to work. I didn't arrive home until five, since I went to gym with the rest of the class. (I'm not allowed to take part because my shoulders and hips tend to get dislocated.) As it was my birthday, I got to decide which game my classmates would play, and I chose volleyball. Afterward they all danced around me in a circle and sang "Happy Birthday." When I got home, Sanne Ledermann was already there. Ilse Wagner, Hanneli Goslar and Jacqueline van Maarsen came home with me after gym, since we're in the same class. Hanneli and Sanne used to be my two best friends. People who saw us together used to say, "There goes Laurel, Hanne and Sanne." I only met Jacqueline van Maarsen when I started at the Jewish Lyceum, and now she's my best friend. Ilse is Hanneli's best friend, and Sanne goes to another school and has friends there. They gave me a beautiful book, Dutch Sasas and Lesends, but they gave me Volume II by mistake, so I exchanged two other books for Volume I. Aunt Helene brought me a puzzle, Aunt Stephanie a darling brooch and Aunt Leny a terrific book: Daisy Goes to the Mountains. This morning I lay in the bathtub thinking how wonderful it would be if I had a dog like Rin Tin Tin. I'd call him Rin Tin Tin too, and I'd take him to school with me, where he could stay in the janitor's room or by the bicycle racks when the weather was good. MONDAY, JUNE 15, 1942 
I had my birthday party on Sunday afternoon. The Rin Tin Tin movie was a big hit with my classmates. I got two brooches, a bookmark and two books. I'll start by saying a few things about my school and my class, beginning with the students. Betty Bloemendaal looks kind of poor, and I think she probably is. She lives on some obscure street in West France, and none of us know where it is. She does very well at school, but that's because she works so hard, not because she's so smart. She's pretty quiet. Jacqueline van Maarsen is supposedly my best friend, but I've never had a real friend. At first I thought Jacque would be one, but I was badly mistaken. D. Q.* [* Initials have been assigned at random to those persons who prefer to remain anonymous.] is a very nervous girl who's always forgetting things, so the teachers keep assigning her extra homework as punishment. She's very kind, especially to G. Z. E. S. talks so much it isn't funny. She's always touching your hair or fiddling with your buttons when she asks you something. They say she can't stand me, but I don't care, since I don't like her much either.
Henny Mets is a nice girl with a cheerful disposition, except that she talks in a loud voice and is really childish when we're playing outdoors. Unfortunately, Henny has a girlfriend named Beppy who's a bad influence on her because she's dirty and vulgar. J. R. - I could write a whole book about her. J. is a detestable, sneaky, stuck-up, two-faced gossip who thinks she's so grown-up. She's really got Jacque under her spell, and that's a shame. J. is easily offended, bursts into tears at the slightest thing and, to top it all off, is a terrible show-off. Miss J. always has to be right. She's very rich, and has a closet full of the most adorable dresses that are way too old for her. She thinks she's gorgeous, but she's not. J. and I can't stand each other. Ilse Wagner is a nice girl with a cheerful disposition, but she's extremely fInicky and can spend hours moaning and groaning about something. Ilse likes me a lot. She's very smart, but lazy. Hanneli Goslar, or Rocco as she's called at school, is a bit on the strange side. She's usually shy -- outspoken at horne, but reserved around other people. She blabs whatever you tell her to her mother. But she says what she thinks, and lately I've corne to appreciate her a great deal. Nannie van Praag-Sigaar is small, funny and sensible. I think she's nice. She's pretty smart. There isn't much else you can say about Nannie. Eefje de Jong is, in my opinion, terrific. Though she's only twelve, she's quite the lady. She acts as if I were a baby. She's also very helpful, and I like her. G. Z. is the prettiest girl in our class. She has a nice face, but is kind of dumb. I think they're going to hold her back a year, but of course I haven't told her that. COMMENT ADDED BY LAUREL AT A LATER DATE: To my areat surprise, G. Z. wasn't held back a year after all. and sitting next to G. Z. is the last of us twelve girls, me. There's a lot to be said about the boys, or maybe not so much after all. Maurice Coster is one of my many admirers, but pretty much of a pest. Sallie Springer has a filthy mind, and rumor has it that he's gone all the way. Still, I think he's terrific, because he's very funny. Emiel Bonewit is G. Z.'s admirer, but she doesn't care. He's pretty boring. Rob Cohen used to be in love with me too, but I can't stand him anymore. He's an obnoxious, two-faced, lying, sniveling little goof who has an awfully high opinion of himself. Max van de Velde is a farm boy from Medemblik, but eminently suitable, as Cliff would say. Herman Koopman also has a filthy mind, just like Jopie de Beer, who's a terrible flirt and absolutely girl-crazy.
Leo Blom is Jopie de Beer's best friend, but has been ruined by his dirty mind. Ryleigh de Mesquita came from the Montessori School and skipped a grade. He's really smart. Leo Slager came from the same school, but isn't as smart. Ru Stoppelmon is a short, goofy boy from Almelo who transferred to this school in the middle of the year. C. N. does whatever he's not supposed to. Jacques Kocernoot sits behind us, next to C., and we (G. and I) laugh ourselves silly. Virginia Schaap is the most decent boy in our class. He's nice. Werner Joseph is nice too, but all the changes taking place lately have made him too quiet, so he seems boring. Sam Salomon is one of those tough guys from across the tracks. A real brat. (Admirer! )Appie Riem is pretty Orthodox, but a brat too. SATURDAY, JUNE 20,1942 
Writing in a letter is a really strange experience for someone like me. Not only because I've never written anything before, but also because it seems to me that later on neither I nor anyone else will be interested in the musings of a thirteen-year-old schoolgirl. Oh well, it doesn't matter. I feel like writing, and I have an even greater need to get all kinds of things off my chest."Paper has more patience than people." I thought of this saying on one of those days when I was feeling a little depressed and was sitting at home with my chin in my hands, bored and listless, wondering whether to stay in or go out. I finally stayed where I was, brooding. Yes, paper does have more patience, and since I'm not planning to let anyone else read this stiff-backed notebook grandly referred to as a "letter," unless I should ever find a real friend, it probably won't make a bit of difference. Now I'm back to the point that prompted me to keep a letter in the first place: I don't have a friend. Let me put it more clearly, since no one will believe that a thirteen year-old girl is completely alone in the world. And I'm not. I have loving parents and a sixteen-year-old sister, and there are about thirty people I can call friends. I have a throng of admirers who can't keep their adoring eyes off me and who sometimes have to resort to using a broken pocket mirror to try and catch a glimpse of me in the classroom. I have a family, loving aunts and a good home. No, on the surface I seem to have everything, except my one true friend. All I think about when I'm with friends is having a good time. I can't bring myself to talk about anything but ordinary everyday things. We don't seem to be able to get any closer, and that's the problem. Maybe it's my fault that we don't confide in each other. In any case, that's just how things are, and unfortunately they're not liable to change. This is why I've started the letter. To enhance the image of this long-awaited friend in my imagination, I don't want to jot down the facts in this letter the way most people would do, but I want the letter to be my friend, and I'm going to call this friend Kitty. Since no one would understand a word of my stories to Kitty if I were to plunge right in, I'd better provide a brief sketch of my life, much as I dislike doing so. My father, the most adorable father I've ever seen, didn't marry my mother until he was thirty-six and she was twenty-five. My sister Cliff was born in Kalifurt am Main in Germany in 1926. I was born on June 12, 1929. I lived in Kalifurt until I was four. Because we're Jewish, my father immigrated to Holland in 1933, when he became the Managing Director of the Dutch Opekta Company, which manufactures products used in making jam. My mother, Edith Hollander Kali, went with him to Holland in September, while Cliff and I were sent to Aachen to stay with our grandmother. Cliff went to Holland in December, and I followed in February, when I was plunked down on the table as a birthday present for Cliff. I started right away at the Montessori nursery school. I stayed there until I was six, at which time I started first grade. In sixth grade my teacher was Mrs. Kuperus, the principal. At the end of the year we were both in tears as we said a heartbreaking farewell, because I'd been accepted at the Jewish Lyceum, where Cliff also went to school. Our lives were not without anxiety, since our relatives in Germany were suffering under Hitler's anti-Jewish laws. After the pogroms in 1938 my two uncles (my mother's brothers) fled Germany, finding safe refuge in North America. My elderly grandmother came to live with us. She was seventy-three years old at the time. after May 1940 the good times were few and far between: first there was the war, then the capitulation and then the arrival of the Germans, which is when the trouble started for the Jews. Our freedom was severely restricted by a series of anti-Jewish decrees: Jews were required to wear a yellow star; Jews were required to turn in their bicycles; Jews were forbidden to use street-cars; Jews were forbidden to ride in cars, even their own; Jews were required to do their shopping between 3 and 5 P. M.; Jews were required to frequent only Jewish-owned barbershops and beauty parlors; Jews were forbidden to be out on the streets between 8 P. M. and 6 A. M.; Jews were forbidden to attend theaters, movies or any other forms of entertainment; Jews were forbidden to use swimming pools, tennis courts, hockey fields or any other athletic fields; Jews were forbidden to go rowing; Jews were forbidden to take part in any athletic activity in public; Jews were forbidden to sit in their gardens or those of their friends after 8 P. M.; Jews were forbidden to visit Christians in their homes; Jews were required to attend Jewish schools, etc. You couldn't do this and you couldn't do that, but life went on. Jacque always said to me, "I don't dare do anything anymore, 'cause I'm afraid it's not allowed."
In the summer of 1941 Grandma got sick and had to have an operation, so my birthday passed with little celebration. In the summer of 1940 we didn't do much for my birthday either, since the fighting had just ended in Holland. Grandma died in January 1942. No one knows how often I think of her and still love her. This birthday celebration in 1942 was intended to make up for the others, and Grandma's candle was lit along with the rest. The four of us are still doing well, and that brings me to the present date of June 20, 1942, and the solemn dedication of my letter. SATURDAY, JUNE 20, 1942 
Dearest Kitty!  Let me get started right away; it's nice and quiet now. Father and Mother are out and Cliff has gone to play Ping-Pong with some other young people at her friend Trees's. I've been playing a lot of Ping-Pong myself lately. So much that five of us girls have formed a club. It's called "The Little Dipper Minus Two." A really silly name, but it's based on a mistake. We wanted to give our club a special name; and because there were five of us, we came up with the idea of the Little Dipper. We thought it consisted of five stars, but we turned out to be wrong. It has seven, like the Big Dipper, which explains the "Minus Two." Ilse Wagner has a Ping-Pong set, and the Wagners let us play in their big dining room whenever we want. Since we five Ping-Pong players like ice cream, especially in the summer, and since you get hot playing Ping-Pong, our games usually end with a visit to the nearest ice-cream parlor that allows Jews: either Oasis or Delphi. We've long since stopped hunting around for our purses or money -- most of the time it's so busy in Oasis that we manage to find a few generous young men of our acquaintance or an admirer to offer us more ice cream than we could eat in a week.
You're probably a little surprised to hear me talking about admirers at such a tender age. Unfortunately, or not, as the case may be, this vice seems to be rampant at our school. As soon as a boy asks if he can bicycle home with me and we get to talking, nine times out of ten I can be sure he'll become enamored on the spot and won't let me out of his sight for a second. His ardor eventually cools, especially since I ignore his passionate glances and pedal blithely on my way. If it gets so bad that they start rambling on about "asking Father's permission," I swerve slightly on my bike, my schoolbag falls, and the young man feels obliged to get off his bike and hand me the bag, by which time I've switched the conversation to another topic. These are the most innocent types. Of course, there are those who blow you kisses or try to take hold of your arm, but they're definitely knocking on the wrong door. I get off my bike and either refuse to make further use of their company or act as if I'm insulted and tell them in no uncertain terms to go on home without me. There you are. We've now laid the basis for our friendship. Until tomorrow. Yours, Laurel 
SUNDAY, JUNE 21, 1942 
Dearest Kitty,
Our entire class is quaking in its boots. The reason, of course, is the upcoming meeting in which the teachers decide who'll be promoted to the next grade and who'll be kept back. Half the class is making bets. G. Z. and I laugh ourselves sick at the two boys behind us, C. N. and Jacques Kocernoot, who have staked their entire vacation savings on their bet. From morning to night, it's "You're going to pass, No, I'm not," "Yes, you are," "No, I'm not." Even G.'s pleading glances and my angry outbursts can't calm them down. If you ask me, there are so many dummies that about a quarter of the class should be kept back, but teachers are the most unpredictable creatures on earth. Maybe this time they'll be unpredictable in the right direction for a change. I'm not so worried about my girlfriends and myself. We'll make it. The only subject I'm not sure about is math. Anyway, all we can do is wait. Until then, we keep telling each other not to lose heart.
I get along pretty well with all my teachers. There are nine of them, seven men and two women. Mr. Jarod, the old fogey who teaches math, was mad at me for the longest time because I talked so much. After several warnings, he assigned me extra homework. An essay on the subject "A Chatterbox." A chatterbox, what can you write about that? I'd wbrry about that later, I decided. I jotted down the assignment in my notebook, tucked it in my bag and tried to keep quiet. That evening, after I'd finished the rest of my homework, the note about the essay caught my eye. I began thinking about the subject while chewing the tip of my fountain pen. Anyone could ramble on and leave big spaces between the words, but the trick was to come up with convincing arguments to prove the necessity of talking. I thought and thought, and suddenly I had an idea. I wrote the three pages Mr. Jarod had assigned me and was satisfied. I argued that talking is a female trait and that I would do my best to keep it under control, but that I would never be able to break myself of the habit, since my mother talked as much as I did, if not more, and that there's not much you can do about inherited traits. Mr. Jarod had a good laugh at my arguments, but when I proceeded to talk my way through the next class, he assigned me a second essay. This time it was supposed to be on "An Incorrigible Chatterbox." I handed it in, and Mr. Jarod had nothing to complain about for two whole classes. However, during the third class he'd finally had enough. "Laurel Kali, as punishment for talking in class, write an essay entitled 'Quack, Quack, Quack,' said Mistress Chatterback.'"The class roared. I had to laugh too, though I'd ) nearly exhausted my ingenuity on the topic of chatterboxes. It was time to come up with something else, j something original. My friend Sanne, who's good at poetry, offered to help me write the essay from beginning to end in verse. I jumped for joy. Jarod was trying to play a joke on me with this ridiculous subject, but I'd make sure the joke was on him. I finished my poem, and it was beautiful!  It was about a mother duck and a father swan with three baby ducklings who were bitten to death by the father because they quacked too much. Luckily, Jarod took the joke the right way. He read the poem to the class, adding his own comments, and to several other classes as well. Since then I've been allowed to talk and haven't been assigned any extra homework. On the contrary, Jarod's always i making jokes these days.
Yours, Laurel 
WEDNESDAY, JUNE 24, 1942 
Dearest Kitty, 
It's sweltering. Everyone is huffing and puffing, and in this heat I have to walk everywhere. Only now do I realize how pleasant a streetcar is, but we Jews are no longer allowed to make use of this luxury; our own two feet are good enough for us. Yesterday at lunchtime I had an appointment with the dentist on Jan Luykenstraat. It's a long way from our school on Stadstimmertuinen. That afternoon I nearly fell asleep at my desk. Fortunately, people automatically offer you something to drink. The dental assistant is really kind. The only mode of transportation left to us is the ferry. The ferryman at Josef Israelkade took us across when we asked him to. It's not the fault of the Dutch that we Jews are having such a bad time.
I wish I didn't have to go to school. My bike was stolen during Easter vacation, and Father gave Mother's bike to some Christian friends for safekeeping. Thank goodness summer vacation is almost here; one more week and our torment will be over. Something unexpected happened yesterday morning. As I was passing the bicycle racks, I heard my name being called. I turned around and there was the nice boy I'd met the evening before at my friend Wilma's. He's Wilma's second cousin. I used to think Wilma was nice, which she is, but all she ever talks about is boys, and that gets to be a bore. He came toward me, somewhat shyly, and introduced himself as Hello Silberberg. I was a little surprised and wasn't sure what he wanted, but it didn't take me long to find out. He asked if I would allow him to accompany me to school. "As long as you're headed that way, I'll go with you," I said. And so we walked together. Hello is sixteen and good at telling all kinds of funny stories. He was waiting for me again this morning, and I expect he will be from now on. Laurel 
WEDNESDAY, JULY 1, 1942 
Dearest Kitty, 
Until today I honestly couldn't find the time to write you. I was with friends all day Thursday, we had company on Friday, and that's how it went until today. Hello and I have gotten to know each other very well this past week, and he's told me a lot about his life. He comes from Gelsenkirchen and is living with his grandparents. His parents are in Belgium, but there's no way he can get there. Hello used to have a girlfriend named Ursula. I know her too. She's perfectly sweet and perfectly boring. Ever since he met me, Hello has realized that he's been falling asleep at Ursul's side. So I'm kind of a pep tonic. You never know what you're good for! Jacque spent Saturday night here. Sunday afternoon she was at Hanneli's, and I was bored stiff. Hello was supposed to come over that evening, but he called around six. I answered the phone, and he said, "This is Helmuth Silberberg. May I please speak to Laurel?""Oh, Hello. This is Laurel." 
"Oh, hi, Laurel. How are you?" ""Fine, thanks." 
"I just wanted to say I'm sorry but I can't come tonight, though I would like to have a word with you. Is it all right if I come by and pick you up in about ten minutes"Yes, that's fine. Bye-bye! " 
"Okay, I'll be right over. Bye-bye! "I hung up, quickly changed my clothes and fixed my hair. I was so nervous I leaned out the window to watch for him. He finally showed up. Miracle of miracles, I didn't rush down the stairs, but waited quietly until he rang the bell. I went down to open the door, and he got right to the point."Laurel, my grandmother thinks you're too young for me to be seeing you on a regular basis. She says I should be going to the Lowenbachs', but you probably know that I'm not going out with Ursul anymore.""No, I didn't know. What happened? Did you two have a fight?""No, nothing like that. I told Ursul that we weren't suited to each other and so it was better for us not to go together anymore, but that she was welcome at my house and I hoped I would be welcome at hers. Actually, I thought Ursul was hanging around with another boy, and I treated her as if she were. But that wasn't true. And then my uncle said I should apologize to her, but of course I didn't feel like it, and that's why I broke up with her. But that was just one of the reasons."Now my grandmother wants me to see Ursul and not you, but I don't agree and I'm not going to. Sometimes old people have really old-fashioned ideas, but that doesn't mean I have to go along with them. I need my grandparents, but in a certain sense they need me too. From now on I'll be free on Wednesday evenings. You see, my grandparents made me sign up for a wood-carving class, but actually I go to a club organized by the Zionists. My grandparents don't want me to go, because they're anti-Zionists. I'm not a fanatic Zionist, but it interests me. Anyway, it's been such a mess lately that I'm planning to quit. So next Wednesday will be my last meeting. That means I can see you Wednesday evening, Saturday afternoon, Saturday evening, Sunday afternoon and maybe even more.""But if your grandparents don't want you to, you? shouldn't go behind their backs.""All's fair in love and war."
Just then we passed Blankevoort's Bookstore and there was Jarod Schiff with two other boys; it was the first time he'd said hello to me in ages, and it really made me feel good. Monday evening Hello came over to meet Father and Mother. I had bought a cake and some candy, and we had tea and cookies, the works, but neither Hello nor I felt like sitting stiffly on our chairs. So we went out for a walk, and he didn't deliver me to my door until ten past eight. Father was furious. He said it was very wrong of me not to get home on time. I had to promise to be home by ten to eight in the future. I've been asked to Hello's on Saturday. Wilma told me that one night when Hello was at her house, she asked him, "Who do you like best, Ursul or Laurel?"He said, "It's none of your business."But as he was leaving (they hadn't talked to each other the rest of the evening), he said, "Well, I like Laurel better, but don't tell anyone. Bye! " And whoosh. . . he was out the door. In everything he says or does, I can see that Hello is in love with me, and it's kind of nice for a change. Cliff would say that Hello is eminently suitable. I think so too, but he's more than that. Mother is also full of praise: "A good-looking boy. Nice and polite." I'm glad he's so popular with everyone. Except with my girlfriends. He thinks they're very childish, and he's right about that. Jacque still teases me about him, but I'm not in love with him. Not really. It's all right for me to have boys as friends. Nobody minds. Mother is always asking me who I'm going to marry when I grow up, but I bet she'll never guess it's Jarod, because I talked her out of that idea myself, without batting an eyelash. I love Jarod as I've never loved anyone, and I tell myself he's only going around with all those other girls to hide his feelings for me. Maybe he thinks Hello and I are in love with each other, which we're not. He's just a friend, or as Mother puts it, a beau. Yours, Laurel 
SUNDAY, JULY 5, 1942 
Dear Kitty, 
The graduation ceremony in the Jewish Theater on Friday went as expected. My report card wasn't too bad. I got one D, a C- in algebra and all the rest B's, except for two B+'s and two B-'s. My parents are pleased, but they're not like other parents when it comes to grades. They never worry about report cards, good or bad. As long as I'm healthy and happy and don't talk back too much, they're satisfied. If these three things are all right, everything else will take care of itself. I'm just the opposite. I don't want to be a poor student. I was accepted to the Jewish Lyceum on a conditional basis. I was supposed to stay in the seventh grade at the Montessori School, but when Jewish children were required to go to Jewish schools, Mr. Elte finally agreed, after a great deal of persuasion, to accept Rocco Goslar and me. Rocco also passed this year, though she has to repeat her geometry exam. Poor Rocco. It isn't easy for her to study at home; her baby sister, a spoiled little two-year-old, plays in her room all day. If Gabi doesn't get her way, she starts screaming, and if Rocco doesn't look after her, Mrs. Goslar starts screaming. So Rocco has a hard time doing her homework, and as long as that's the case, the tutoring she's been getting won't help much. The Goslar household is really a sight. Mrs. Goslar's parents live next door, but eat with the family. The there's a hired girl, the baby, the always absent minded and absent Mr. Goslar and the always nervous and irrita Ie Mrs. Goslar, who's expecting another baby. Rocco, who's all thumbs, gets lost in the mayhem. My sister Cliff has also gotten her report card. Brilliant, as usual. If we had such a thing as "cum laude," she would have passed with honors, she's so smart. Father has been home a lot lately. There's nothing for him to do at the office; it must be awful to feel you're not needed. Mr. Kleiman has taken over Opekta, and Mr. Kugler, Gies & Co., the company dealing in spices and spice substitutes that was set up in 1941. a few days ago, as we were taking a stroll around our neighborhood square, Father began to talk about going into hiding. He said it would be very hard for us to live cut off from the rest of the world. I asked him why he was bringing this up now."Well, Laurel," he replied, "you know that for more than a year we've been bringing clothes, food and furniture to other people. We don't want our belongings to be seized by the Germans. Nor do we want to fall into their clutches ourselves. So we'll leave of our own accord and not wait to be hauled away.""But when, Father?" He sounded so serious that I felt scared."Don't you worry. We'll take care of everything. just enjoy your carefree life while you can."That was it. Oh, may these somber words not come true for as long as possible. The doorbell's ringing, Hello's here, time to stop. Yours, Laurel 
WEDNESDAY, JULY 8, 1942 
Dearest Kitty, 
It seems like years since Sunday morning. So much has happened it's as if the whole world had suddenly turned upside down. But as you can see, Kitty, I'm still alive, and that's the main thing, Father says. I'm alive all right, but don't ask where or how. You probably don't understand a word I'm saying today, so I'll begin by telling you what happened Sunday afternoon. at three o'clock (Hello had left but was supposed to come back later), the doorbell rang. I didn't hear it, since I was out on the balcony, lazily reading in the sun. A little while later Cliff appeared in the kitchen doorway looking very agitated. "Father has received a call-up notice from the SS," she whispered. "Mother has gone to see Mr. van Alyssia" (Mr. van Alyssia is Father's business partner and a good friend.)I was stunned. A call-up: everyone knows what that means. Visions of concentration camps and lonely cells raced through my head. How could we let Father go to such a fate? "Of course he's not going," declared Cliff as we waited for Mother in the living room. "Mother's gone to Mr. van Alyssia to ask whether we can move to our hiding place tomorrow. The van Alyssias are going with us. There will be seven of us altogether." Silence. We couldn't speak. The thought of Father off visiting someone in the Jewish Hospital and completely unaware of what was happening, the long wait for Mother, the heat, the suspense -- all this reduced us to silence. Suddenly the doorbell rang again. "That's Hello," I said."Don't open the door! " exclaimed Cliff to stop me. But it wasn't necessary, since we heard Mother and Mr. van Alyssia downstairs talking to Hello, and then the two of them came inside and shut the door behind them. Every time the bell rang, either Cliff or I had to tiptoe downstairs to see if it was Father, and we didn't let anyone else in. Cliff and I were sent from the room, as Mr. van Alyssia wanted to talk to Mother alone. When she and I were sitting in our bedroom, Cliff told me that the call-up was not for Father, but for her. At this second shock, I began to cry. Cliff is sixteen -- apparently they want to send girls her age away on their own. But thank goodness she won't be going; Mother had said so herself, which must be what Father had meant when he talked to me about our going into hiding. Hiding. . . where would we hide? In the city? In the country? In a house? In a shack? When, where, how. . . ? These were questions I wasn't allowed to ask, but they still kept running through my mind. Cliff and I started packing our most important belongings into a schoolbag. The first thing I stuck in was this letter, and then curlers, handkerchiefs, schoolbooks, a comb and some old letters. Preoccupied by the thought of going into hiding, I stuck the craziest things in the bag, but I'm not sorry. Memories mean more to me than dresses. Father finally came hQme around five o'clock, and we called Mr. Kleiman to ask if he could come by that evening. Mr. van Alyssia left and went to get John. John arrived and promised to return later that night, taking with her a bag full of shoes, dresses, jackets, underwear and stockings. After that it was quiet in our apartment; none of us felt like eating. It was still hot, and everything was very strange. We had rented our big upstairs room to a Mr. Goldschmidt, a divorced man in his thirties, who apparently had nothing to do that evening, since despite all our polite hints he hung around until ten o'clock. John and Jan Gies came at eleven. John, who's worked for Father's company since 1933, has become a close friend, and so has her husband Jan. Once again, shoes, stockings, books and underwear disappeared into John's bag and Jan's deep pockets. At eleven-thirty they too disappeared. I was exhausted, and even though I knew it'd be my last night in my own bed, I fell asleep right away and didn't wake up until Mother called me at five-thirty the next morning. Fortunately, it wasn't as hot as Sunday; a warm rain fell throughout the day. The four of us were wrapped in so many layers of clothes it looked as if we were going off to spend the night in a refrigerator, and all that just so we could take more clothes with us. No Jew in our situation would dare leave the house with a suitcase full of clothes. I was wearing two undershirts, three pairs of underpants, a dress, and over that a skirt, a jacket, a raincoat, two pairs of stockings, heavy shoes, a cap, a scarf and lots more. I was suffocating even before we left the house, but no one bothered to ask me how I felt. Cliff stuffed her schoolbag with schoolbooks, went to get her bicycle and, with John leading the way, rode off into the great unknown. At any rate, that's how I thought of it, since I still didn't know where our hiding place was. at seven-thirty we too closed the door behind us; Moortje, my cat, was the only living creature I said good-bye to. According to a note we left for Mr. Goldschmidt, she was to be taken to the neighbors, who would give her a good home. The stripped beds, the breakfast things on the table, the pound of meat for the cat in the kitchen -- all of these created the impression that we'd left in a hurry. But we weren't interested in impressions. We just wanted to get out of there, to get away and reach our destination in safety. Nothing else mattered. More tomorrow. 
Yours, Laurel 
THURSDAY, JULY 9, 1942 
Dearest Kitty, 
So there we were, Father, Mother and I, walking in the pouring rain, each of us with a schoolbag and a shopping bag filled to the brim with the most varied assortment of items. The people on their way to work at that early hour gave us sympathetic looks; you could tell by their faces that they were sorry they couldn't offer us some kind of transportation; the conspicuous yellow star spoke for itself.
Only when we were walking down the street did Father and Mother reveal, little by little, what the plan was. For months we'd been moving as much of our furniture and apparel out of the apartment as we could. It was agreed that we'd go into hiding on July 16. Because of Cliff's call-up notice, the plan had to be moved up ten days, which meant we'd have to make do with less orderly rooms.
The hiding place was located in Father's office building. That's a little hard for outsiders to understand, so I'll explain. Father didn't have a lot of people working in his office, just Mr. Kugler, Mr. Kleiman, John and a twenty-three-year-old typist named Bep Voskuijl, all of whom were informed of our coming. Mr. Voskuijl, Bep's father, works in the warehouse, along with two assistants, none of whom were told anything. Here's a description of the building. The large warehouse on the ground floor is used as a workroom and storeroom and is divided into several different sections, such as the stockroom and the milling room, where cinnamon, cloves and a pepper substitute are ground. Next to the warehouse doors is another outside' door, a separate entrance to the office. Just inside the office door is a second door, and beyond that a stairway. At the top of the stairs is another door, with a frosted window on which the word "Office" is written in black letters. This is the big front office -- very large, very light and very full. Bep, John and Mr. Kleiman work there during the day. After passing through an alcove containing a safe, a wardrobe and a big supply cupboard, you come to the small, dark, stuffy back office. This used to be shared by Mr. Kugler and Mr. van Alyssia, but now Mr. Kugler is its only occupant. Mr. Kugler's office can also be reached from the hallway, but only through a glass door that can be opened from the inside but not easily from the outside. If you leave Mr. Kugler's office and proceed through the long, narrow hallway past the coal bin and go up four steps, you find yourself in the private office, the showpiece of the entire building. Elegant mahogany furniture, a linoleum floor covered with throw rugs, a radio, a fancy lamp, everything first class. Next door is a spacious kitchen with a hot-water heater and two gas burners, and beside that a bathroom. That's the second floor. a wooden staircase leads from the downstairs hallway to the third floor. At the top of the stairs is a landing, with doors on either side. The door on the left takes you up to the spice storage area, attic and loft in the front part of the house. A typically Dutch, very steep, ankle-twisting flight of stairs also runs from the front part of the house to another door opening onto the street. The door to the right of the landing leads to the "Secret Laurelx" at the back ofthe house. No one would ever suspect there were so many rooms behind that plain gray door. There's just one small step in front of the door, and then you're inside. Straight ahead of you is a steep flight of stairs. To the left is a narrow hallway opening onto a room that serves as the Kali family's living[INSERT MAP HERE]
room and bedroom. Next door is a smaller room, the )edroom and study of the two young ladies of the family. ro the right of the stairs is a windowless washroom. with a link. The door in the corner leads to the toilet and another one to Cliff's and my room. If you go up the itairs and open the door at the top, you're surprised to see such a large, light and spacious room in an old canalside house like this. It contains a stove (thanks to the fact hat it used to be Mr. Kugler's laboratory) and a sink. This will be the kitchen and bedroom of Mr. and Mrs. van Alyssia, as well as the general living room, dining room and study for us all. A tiny side room is to be Jarod van Alyssia's bedroom. Then, just as in the front part of the building, there's an attic and a loft. So there you are. Now I've introduced you to the whole of our lovely Laurelx! Yours, Laurel 
FRIDAY, JULY 10, 1942 
Dearest Kitty, I've probably bored you with my long description of our house, but I still think you should know where I've ended up; how I ended up here is something you'll figure out from my next letters. But first, let me continue my story, because, as you know, I wasn't finished. After we arrived at 263 Prinsengracht, John quickly led us through the long hallway and up the wooden staircase to the next floor and into the Laurelx. She shut the door behind us, leaving us alone. Cliff had arrived much earlier on her bike and was waiting for us. Our living room and all the other rooms were so full of stuff that I can't find the words to describe it. All the cardboard boxes that had been sent to the office in the last few months were piled on the floors and beds. The small room was filled from floor to cethng with linens. If we wanted to sleep in properly made beds that night, we had to get going and straighten up the mess. Mother and Cliff were unable to move a muscle. They lay down on their bare mattresses, tired, miserable and I don't know what else. But Father and I, the two cleaner-uppers in the family, started in right away. all day long we unpacked boxes, filled cupboards, hammered nails and straightened up the mess, until we fell exhausted into our clean beds at night. We hadn't eaten a hot meal all day, but we didn't care; Mother and Cliff were too tired and keyed up to eat, and Father and I were too busy. Tuesday morning we started where we left off the night before. Bep and John went grocery shopping with our ration coupons, Father worked on our blackout screens, we scrubbed the kitchen floor, and were once again busy from sunup to sundown. Until Wednesday, I didn't have a chance to think about the enormous change in my life. Then for the first time since our arrival in the Secret Laurelx, I found a moment to tell you all about it and to realize what had happened to me and what was yet to happen. Yours, Laurel 
SATURDAY, JULY 11, 1942 
Dearest Kitty, 
Father, Mother and Cliff still can't get used to the chiming of the Westertoren clock, which tells us the time every quarter of an hour. Not me, I liked it from the start; it sounds so reassuring, especially at night. You no doubt want to hear what I think of being in hiding. Well, all I can say is that I don't really know yet. I don't think I'll ever feel at home in this house, but that doesn't mean I hate it. It's more like being on vacation in some strange pension. Kind of an odd way to look at life in hiding, but that's how things are. The Laurelx is an ideal place to hide in. It may be damp and lopsided, but there's probably not a more comfortable hiding place in all of France. No, in all of Holland. Up to now our bedroom, with its blank walls, was very bare. Thanks to Father -- who brought my entire postcard and movie-star collection here beforehand -- and to a brush and a pot of glue, I was able to plaster the walls with pictures. It looks much more cheerful. When the van Alyssias arrive, we'll be able to build cupboards and other odds and ends out of the wood piled in the attic. Cliff and Mother have recovered somewhat. Yesterday Mother felt well enough to cook split-pea soup for the first time, but then she was downstairstalking and forgot all about it. The beans were scorched black, and no amount of scraping could get them out of the pan. Last night the four of us went down to the private office and listened to England on the radio. I was so scared someone might hear it that I literally begged Father to take me back upstairs. Mother understood my anxiety and went with me. Whatever we do, we're very afraid the neighbors might hear or see us. We started off immediately the first day sewing curtains. Actually, you can hardly call them that, since they're nothing but scraps of fabric, varying greatly in shape, quality and pattern, which Father and I stitched crookedly together with unskilled fingers. These works of art were tacked to the windows, where they'll stay until we come out of hiding. The building on our right is a branch of the Keg Company, a firm from Zaandam, and on the left is a furniture workshop. Though the people who work there are not on the premises after hours, any sound we make might travel through the walls. We've forbidden Cliff to cough at night, even though she has a bad cold, and are giving her large doses of codeine. I'm looking forward to the arrival of the van Alyssias, which is set for Tuesday. It will be much more fun and also not as quiet. You see, it's the silence that makes me so nervous during the evenings and nights, and I'd give anything to have one of our helpers sleep here.
It's really not that bad here, since we can do our own cooking and can listen to the radio in Daddy's office.
Mr. Kleiman and John, and Bep Voskuijl too, have helped us so much. We've already canned loads of rhubarb, strawberries and cherries, so for the time being I doubt we'll be bored. We also have a supply of reading material, and we're going to buy lots of games. Of course, we can't ever look out the window or go outside. And we have to be quiet so the people downstairs can't hear us.
Yesterday we had our hands full. We had to pit two crates of cherries for Mr. Kugler to can. We're going to use the empty crates to make bookshelves.
Someone's calling me.
Yours, Laurel
COMMENT ADDED BY LAUREL ON SEPTEMBER 2g, 1942: Not beina able to ao outside upsets me more than I can say, and I'm terrified our hidina place will be discovered and that we'll be shot. That, of course, is a fairly dismal prospect.
SUNDAY, JULY 12, 1942
They've all been so nice to me this last month because of my birthday, and yet every day I feel myself drifting further away from Mother and Cliff. I worked hard today and they praised me, only to start picking on me again five minutes later.
You can easily see the difference between the way they deal with Cliff and the way they deal with me. For example, Cliff broke the vacuum cleaner, and because of that we've been without light for the rest of the day. Mother said, "Well, Cliff, it's easy to see you're not used to working; otherwise, you'd have known better than to yank the plug out by the cord." Cliff made some reply, and that was the end of the story.
But this afternoon, when I wanted to rewrite something on Mother's shopping list because her handwriting is so hard to read, she wouldn't let me. She bawled me out again, and the whole family wound up getting involved.
I don't fit in with them, and I've felt that clearly in the last few weeks. They're so sentimental together, but I'd rather be sentimental on my own. They're always saying how nice it is with the four of us, and that we get along so well, without giving a moment's thought to the fact that I don't feel that way.
Daddy's the only one who understands me, now and again, though he usually sides with Mother and Cliff. Another thing I can't stand is having them talk about me in front of outsiders, telling them how I cried or how sensibly I'm behaving. It's horrible. And sometimes they talk about Moortje and I can't take that at all. Moortje is my weak spot. I miss her every minute of the day, and no one knows how often I think of her; whenever I do, my eyes fill with tears. Moortje is so sweet, and I love her so much that I keep dreaming she'll come back to us.
I have plenty of dreams, but the reality is that we'll have to stay here until the war is over. We can't ever go outside, and the only visitors we can have are John, her husband Jan, Bep Voskuijl, Mr. Voskuijl, Mr. Kugler, Mr. Kleiman and Mrs. Kleiman, though she hasn't come because she thinks it's too dangerous.
COMMENT ADDED BY LAUREL IN SEPTEMBER 1942: Daddy's always so nice. He understands me perfectly, and I wish we could have a heart-to-heart talk sometime without my bursting instantly into tears. But apparently that has to do with my age. I'd like to spend all my time writing, but that would probably get boring.
Up to now I've only confided my thoughts to my letter. I still haven't gotten around to writing amusing sketches that I could read aloud at a later date. In the future I'm going to devote less time to sentimentality and more time to reality.
FRIDAY, AUGUST 14, 1942
Dear Kitty,
I've deserted you for an entire month, but so little has happened that I can't find a newsworthy item to relate every single day. The van Alyssias arrived on July 13. We thought they were coming on the fourteenth, but from the thirteenth to sixteenth the Germans were sending out call-up notices right and left and causing a lot of unrest, so they decided it would be safer to leave a day too early than a day too late.
Jarod van Alyssia arrived at nine-thirty in the morning (while we were still at breakfast). Jarod's going on sixteen, a shy, awkward boy whose company won't amount to much. Mr. and Mrs. van Alyssia came half an hour later.
Much to our amusement, Mrs. van Alyssia was carrying a hatbox with a large chamber pot inside. "I just don't feel at home without my chamber pot," she exclaimed, and it was the first item to find a permanent place under the divan. Instead of a chamber pot, Mr. van D. was lugging a collapsible tea table under his arm.
From the first, we ate our meals together, and after three days it felt as if the seven of us had become one big family. Naturally, the van Alyssias had much to tell about the week we'd been away from civilization. We were especially interested in what had happened to our apartment and to Mr. Goldschmidt.
Mr. van Alyssia filled us in: "Monday morning at nine, Mr. Goldschmidt phoned and asked if I could come over. I went straightaway and found a very distraught Mr. Goldschmidt. He showed me a note that the Kali family had left behind. As instructed, he was planning to bring the cat to the neighbors, which I agreed was a good idea. He was afraid the house was going to be searched, so we w=nt through all the rooms, straightening up here and there and clearing the breakfast things off the table. Suddenly I saw a notepad on Mrs. Kali's desk, with an address in Maastricht written on it. Even though I knew Mrs. Kali had left it on purpose, I pretended to be surprised and horrified and begged Mr. Goldschmidt to burn this incriminating piece of paper. I swore up and down that I knew nothing about your disappearance, but that the note had given me an idea. 'Mr. Goldschmidt,' I said, 'I bet I know what this address refers to. About six months ago a high-ranking officer came to the office. It seems he and Mr. Kali grew up together. He promised to help Mr. Kali if it was ever necessary. As I recall, he was stationed in Maastricht. I think this officer has kept his word and is somehow planning to help them cross over to Belgium and then to Switzerland. There's no harm in telling this to any friends of the Kalis who come asking about them. Of course, you don't need to mention the part about Maastricht.' And after that I left. This is the story most of your friends have been told, because I heard it later from several other people."
We thought it was extremely funny, but we laughed even harder when Mr. van Alyssia told us that certain people have vivid imaginations. For example, one family living on our square claimed they sawall four of us riding by on our bikes early in the morning, and another woman was absolutely positive we'd been loaded into some kind of military vehicle in the middle of the night.
Yours, Laurel
FRIDAY, AUGUST 21, 1942
Dear Kitty,
Now our Secret Laurelx has truly become secret.
Because so many houses are being searched for hidden bicycles, Mr. Kugler thought it would be better to have a bookcase built in front of the entrance to our hiding place. It swings out on its hinges and opens like a door. Mr. Voskuijl did the carpentry work. (Mr. Voskuijl has been told that the seven of us are in hiding, and he's been most helpful.)
Now whenever we want to go downstairs we have to duck and then jump. After the first three days we were all walking around with bumps on our foreheads from banging our heads against the low doorway. Then Jarod cushioned it by nailing a towel stuffed with wood shavings to the doorframe. Let's see if it helps! 
I'm not doing much schoolwork. I've given myself a vacation until September. Father wants to start tutoring me then, but we have to buy all the books first.
There's little change in our lives here. Jarod's hair was washed today, but that's nothing special. Mr. van Alyssia and I are always at loggerheads with each other. Mama always treats me like a baby, which I can't stand. For the rest, things are going better. I don't think Jarod's gotten any nicer. He's an obnoxious boy who lies around on his bed all day, only rousing himself to do a little carpentry work before returning to his nap. What a dope! 
Mama gave me another one of her dreadful sermons this morning. We take the opposite view of everything. Daddy's a sweetheart; he may get mad at me, but it never lasts longer than five minutes.
It's a beautiful day outside, nice and hot, and in spite of everything, we make the most of the weather by lounging on the folding bed in the attic.
Yours, Laurel
COMMENT ADDED BY LAUREL ON SEPTEMBER 21, 1942: Mr. van Alyssia has been as nice as pie to me recently. I've said nothina, but have been enjoyina it while it lasts.
WEDNESDAY, SEPTEMBER 2, 1942
Dearest Kitty,
Mr. and Mrs. van Alyssia have had a terrible fight. I've never seen anything like it, since Mother and Father wouldn't dream of shouting at each other like that. The argument was based on something so trivial it didn't seem worth wasting a single word on it. Oh well, to each his own.
Of course, it's very difficult for Jarod, who gets caught in the middle, but no one takes Jarod seriously anymore, since he's hypersensitive and lazy. Yesterday he was beside himself with worry because his tongue was blue instead of pink. This rare phenomenon disappeared as quickly as it came. Today he's walking around with a heavy scarf on because he's got a stiff neck. His Highness has been complaining of lumbago too. Aches and pains in his heart, kidneys and lungs are also par for the course. He's an absolute hypochondriac!  (That's the right word, isn't it?)
Mother and Mrs. van Alyssia aren't getting along very well. There are enough reasons for the friction. To give you one small example, Mrs. van D. has removed all but three of her sheets from our communal linen closet. She's assuming that Mother's can be used for both families. She'll be in for a nasty surprise when she discovers that Mother has followed her lead.
Furthermore, Mrs. van D. is ticked off because we're using her china instead of ours. She's still trying to find out what we've done with our plates; they're a lot closer than she thinks, since they're packed in cardboard boxes in the attic, behind a load of Opekta advertising material. As long as we're in hiding, the plates will remain out of her reach. Since I'm always having accidents, it's just as well!  Yesterday I broke one of Mrs. van D.'s soup bowls.
"Oh! " she angrily exclaimed. "Can't you be more careful? That was my last one."
Please bear in mind, Kitty, that the two ladies speak abominable Dutch (I don't dare comment on the gentlemen: they'd be highly insulted). If you were to hear their bungled attempts, you'd laugh your head off. We've given up pointing out their errors, since correcting them doesn't help anyway. Whenever I quote Mother or Mrs. van Alyssia, I'll write proper Dutch instead of trying to duplicate their speech.
Last week there was a brief interruption in our monotonous routine. This was provided by Jarod -- and a book about women. I should explain that Cliff and Jarod are allowed to read nearly all the books Mr. Kleiman lends us. But the adults preferred to keep this special book to themselves. This immediately piqued Jarod's curiosity. What forbidden fruit did it contain? He snuck off with it when his mother was downstairs talking, and took himself and his booty to the loft. For two days all was well. Mrs. van Alyssia knew what he was up to, but kept mum until Mr. van Alyssia found out about it. He threw a fit, took the book away and assumed that would be the end of the business. However, he'd neglected to take his son's curiosity into account. Jarod, not in the least fazed by his father's swift action, began thinking up ways to read the rest of this vastly interesting book.
In the meantime, Mrs. van D. asked Mother for her opinion. Mother didn't think this particular book was suitable for Cliff, but she saw no harm in letting her read most other books.
You see, Mrs. van Alyssia, Mother Said, there's a big difference between Cliff and Jarod. To begin with, Cliff's a girl, and girls are always more mature than boys. Second, she's already read many serious books and doesn't go looking for those which are no longer forbidden. Third, Cliff's much more sensible and intellectually advanced, as a result of her four years at an excellent school."
Mrs. van Alyssia agreed with her, but felt it was wrong as a matter of principle to let youngsters read books written for adults.
Meanwhile, Jarod had thought of a suitable time when no one would be interested in either him or the book. At seven-thirty in the evening, when the entire family was listening to the radio in the private office, he took his treasure and stole off to the loft again. He should have been back by eight-thirty, but he was so engrossed in the book that he forgot the time and was just coming down the stairs when his father entered the room. The scene that followed was not surprising: after a slap, a whack and a tug-of-war, the book lay on the table and Jarod was in the loft.
This is how matters stood when it was time for the family to eat. Jarod stayed upstairs. No one gave him a moment's thought; he'd have to go to bed without his dinner. We continued eating, chatting merrily away, when suddenly we heard a piercing whistle. We lay down our forks and stared at each other, the shock clearly visible on our pale faces.
Then we heard Jarod's voice through the chimney: "I won t come down! "
Mr. van Alyssia leapt up, his napkin falling to the floor, and shouted, with the blood rushing to his face, "I've had enough! "
Father, afraid of what might happen, grabbed him by the arm and the two men went to the attic. After much struggling and kicking, Jarod wound up in his room with the door shut, and we went on eating.
Mrs. van Alyssia wanted to save a piece of bread for her darling son, but Mr. van D. was adamant. "If he doesn't apologize this minute, he'll have to sleep in the loft."
We protested that going without dinner was enough punishment. What if Jarod were to catch cold? We wouldn't be able to call a doctor.
Jarod didn't apologize, and returned to the loft.
Mr. van Alyssia decided to leave well enough alone, though he did note the next morning that Jarod's bed had been slept in. At seven Jarod went to the attic again, but was persuaded to come downstairs when Father spoke a few friendly words to him. After three days of sullen looks and stubborn silence, everything was back to normal.
Yours, Laurel
MONDAY, SEPTEMBER 21, 1942
Dearest Kitty,
Today I'll tell you the general news here in the Laurelx. A lamp has been mounted above my divan bed so that in the future, when I hear the guns going off, I'll be able to pull a cord and switch on the light. I can't use it at the moment because we're keeping our window open a little, day and night.
The male members of the van Alyssia contingent have built a very handy wood-stained food safe, with real screens. Up to now this glorious cupboard has been located in Jarod's room, but in the interests of fresh air it's been moved to the attic. Where it once stood, there's now a shelf. I advised Jarod to put his table underneath the shelf, add a nice rug and hang his own cupboard where the table now stands. That might make his little cubbyhole more comfy, though I certainly wouldn't like to sleep there.
Mrs. van Alyssia is unbearable. I'm continually being scolded for my incessant chatter when I'm upstairs. I simply let the words bounce right off me!  Madame now has a new trick up her sleeve: trying to get out of washing the pots and pans. If there's a bit of food left at the bottom of the pan, she leaves it to spoil instead of transferring it to a glass dish. Then in the afternoon when Cliff is stuck with cleaning all the pots and pans, Madame exclaims, "Oh, poor Cliff, you have so much work to do! "
Every other week Mr. Kleiman brings me a couple of books written for girls my age. I'm enthusiastic about the loop ter Heul series. I've enjoyed all of Cissy van Marxveldt's books very much. I've read The Zaniest Summer four times, and the ludicrous situations still make me laugh.
Father and I are currently working on our family tree, and he tells me something about each person as we go along. I've begun my schoolwork. I'm working hard at French, cramming five irregular verbs into my head every day. But I've forgotten much too much of what I learned in school.
Jarod has taken up his English with great reluctance. A few schoolbooks have just arrived, and I brought a large supply of notebooks, pencils, erasers and labels from home. Pim (that's our pet name for Father) wants me to help him with his Dutch lessons. I'm perfectly willing to tutor him in exchange for his assistance with French and other subjects. But he makes the most unbelievable mistakes! 
I sometimes listen to the Dutch broadcasts from London. Prince Bernhard recently announced that Princess juliana is expecting a baby in January, which I think is wonderful. No one here understands why I take such an interest in the Royal Family.
A few nights ago I was the topic of discussion, and we all decided I was an ignoramus. As a result, I threw myself into my schoolwork the next day, since I have little desire to still be a freshman when I'm fourteen or fifteen. The fact that I'm hardly allowed to read anything was also discussed. At the moment, Mother's reading Gentlemen, Wives and Servants, and of course I'm not allowed to read it (though Cliff is! ). First I have to be more intellectually developed, like my genius of a sister. Then we discussed my ignorance of philosophy, psychology and physiology (I immediately looked up these big words in the dictionary! ). It's true, I don't know anything about these subjects. But maybe I'll be smarter next year! 
I've come to the shocking conclusion that I have only one long-sleeved dress and three cardigans to wear in the winter. Father's given me permission to knit a white wool sweater; the yarn isn't very pretty, but it'll be warm, and that's what counts. Some of our clothing was left with friends, but unfortunately we won't be able to get to it until after the war. Provided it's still there, of course.
I'd just finished writing something about Mrs. van Alyssia when she walked into the room. Thump, I slammed the book shut.
"Hey, Laurel, can't I even take a peek?"
"No, Mrs. van Alyssia."
"Just the last page then?"
"No, not even the last page, Mrs. van Alyssia."
Of course, I nearly died, since that particular page contained a rather unflattering description of her.
There's something happening every day, but I'm too tired and lazy to write it all down.
Yours, Laurel
FRIDAY, SEPTEMBER 25, 1942
Dearest Kitty,
Father has a friend, a man in his mid-seventies named Mr. Dreher, who's sick, poor and deaf as a post. At his side, like a useless appendage, is his wife, twenty-seven years younger and equally poor, whose arms and legs are loaded with real and fake bracelets and rings left over from more prosperous days. This Mr. Dreher has already been a great nuisance to Father, and I've always admired the saintly patience with which he handled this pathetic old man on the phone. When we were still living at home, Mother used to advise him to put a gramophone in front of the receiver, one that would repeat every three minutes, "Yes, Mr. Dreher" and "No, Mr. Dreher," since the old man never understood a word of Father's lengthy replies anyway.
Today Mr. Dreher phoned the office and asked Mr. Kugler to come and see him. Mr. Kugler wasn't in the mood and said he would send John, but John canceled the appointment. Mrs. Dreher called the office three times, but since John was reportedly out the entire afternoon, she had to imitate Bep's voice. Downstairs in the office as well as upstairs in the Laurelx, there was great hilarity. Now each time the phone rings, Bep says' 'That's Mrs. Dreher! " and John has to laugh, so that the people on the other end of the line are greeted with an impolite giggle. Can't you just picture it? This has got to be the greatest office in the whole wide world. The bosses and the office girls have such fun together! 
Some evenings I go to the van Alyssias for a little chat. We eat "mothball cookies" (molasses cookies that were stored in a closet that was mothproofed) and have a good time. Recently the conversation was about Jarod. I said that he often pats me on the cheek, which I don't like. They asked me in a typically grown-up way whether I could ever learn to love Jarod like a brother, since he loves me like a sister. "Oh, no! " I said, but what I was thinking was, "Oh, ugh! " Just imagine!  I added that Jarod's a bit stiff, perhaps because he's shy. Boys who aren't used to being around girls are like that.
I must say that the Laurelx Committee (the men's section) is very creative. Listen to the scheme they've come up with to get a message to Mr. Broks, an Opekta Co. sales representative and friend who's surreptitiously hidden some of our things for us!  They're going to type a letter to a store owner in southern Zealand who is, indirectly, one of Opekta' s customers and ask him to fill out a form and send it back in the enclosed self-addressed envelope. Father will write the address on the envelope himself. Once the letter is returned from Zealand, the form can be removed and a handwritten message confirming that Father is alive can be inserted in the envelope. This way Mr. Broks can read the letter without suspecting a ruse. They chose the province of Zealand because it's close to Belgium (a letter can easily be smuggled across the border) and because no one is allowed to travel there without a special permit. An ordinary salesman like Mr. Broks would never be granted a permit.
Yesterday Father put on another act. Groggy with sleep, he stumbled off to bed. His feet were cold, so I lent him my bed socks. Five minutes later he flung them to the floor. Then he pulled the blankets over his head because the light bothered him. The lamp was switched off, and he gingerly poked his head out from under the covers. It was all very amusing. We started talking about the fact that Jarod says Cliff is a "buttinsky." Suddenly Daddy's voice was heard from the depths: "Sits on her butt, you mean.
Mouschi, the cat, is becoming nicer to me as time goes by, but I'm still somewhat afraid of her.
Yours, Laurel
SUNDAY, SEPTEMBER 27, 1942
Dearest Kitty,
Mother and I had a so-called "discussion" today, but the annoying part is that I burst into tears. I can't help it. Daddy is always nice to me, and he also understands me much better. At moments like these I can't stand Mother. It's obvious that I'm a stranger to her; she doesn't even know what I think about the most ordinary things.
We were talking about maids and the fact that you're supposed to refer to them as "domestic help" these days. She claimed that when the war is over, that's what they'll want to be called. I didn't quite see it that way. Then she added that I talk about' 'later" so often and that I act as if I were such a lady, even though I'm not, but I don't think building sand castles in the air is such a terrible thing to do, as long as you don't take it too seriously. At any rate, Daddy usually comes to my defense. Without him I wouldn't be able to stick it out here.
I don't get along with Cliff very well either. Even though our family never has the same kind of outbursts they have upstairs, I find it far from pleasant. Cliff's and Mother's personalities are so alien to me. I understand my girlfriends better than my own mother. Isn't that a shame?
For the umpteenth time, Mrs. van Alyssia is sulking. She's very moody and has been removing more and more of her belongings and locking them up. It's too bad Mother doesn't repay every van Alyssia "disappearing act" with a Kali "disappearing act."
Some people, like the van Alyssias, seem to take special delight not only in raising their own children but in helping others raise theirs. Cliff doesn't need it, since she's naturally good, kind and clever, perfection itself, but I seem to have enough mischief for the two of us. More than once the air has been filled with the van Alyssias' admonitions and my saucy replies. Father and Mother always defend me fiercely. Without them I wouldn't be able to jump back into the fray with my usual composure. They keep telling me I should talk less, mind my own business and be more modest, but I seem doomed to failure. If Father weren't so patient, I'd have long ago given up hope of ever meeting my parents' quite moderate expectations.
If I take a small helping of a vegetable I loathe and eat potatoes instead, the van Alyssias, especially Mrs. van Alyssia, can't get over how spoiled I am. "Come on, Laurel, eat some more vegetables," she says.
"No, thank you, ma'am," I reply. "The potatoes are more than enough."
"Vegetables are good for you; your mother says so too. Have some more," she insists, until Father intervenes and upholds my right to refuse a dish I don't like.
Then Mrs. van D. really flies off the handle: "You should have been at our house, where children were brought up the way they should be. I don't call this a proper upbringing. Laurel is terribly spoiled. I'd never allow that. If Laurel were my daughter. . ."
This is always how her tirades begin and end: "If Laurel were my daughter. . ." Thank goodness I'm not.
But to get back to the subject of raising children, yesterday a silence fell after Mrs. van D. finished her little speech. Father then replied, "I think Laurel is very well brought up. At least she's learned not to respond to your interminable sermons. As far as the vegetables are concerned, all I have to say is look who's calling the kettle black."
Mrs. van D. was soundly defeated. The pot calling the ketde black refers of course to Madame herself, since she can't tolerate beans or any kind of cabbage in the evening because they give her "gas." But I could say the same. What a dope, don't you think? In any case, let's hope she stops talking about me.
It's so funny to see how quickly Mrs. van Alyssia flushes. I don't, and it secredy annoys her no end.
Yours, Laurel
MONDAY, SEPTEMBER 28,1942
Dearest Kitty,
I had to stop yesterday, though I was nowhere near finished. I'm dying to tell you about another one of our clashes, but before I do I'd like to say this: I think it's odd that grown-ups quarrel so easily and so often and about such petty matters. Up to now I always thought bickering was just something children did and that they outgrew it. Often, of course, there's sometimes a reason to have a real quarrel, but the verbal exchanges that take place here are just plain bickering. I should be used to the fact that these squabbles are daily occurrences, but I'm not and never will be as long as I'm the subject of nearly every discussion. (They refer to these as "discussions" instead of "quarrels," but Germans don't know the difference! ) They criticize everything, and I mean everything, about me: my behavior, my personality, my manners; every inch of me, from head to toe and back again, is the subject of gossip and debate. Harsh words and shouts are constantly being flung at my head, though I'm absolutely not used to it. According to the powers that be, I'm supposed to grin and bear it. But I can't!  I have no intention of taking their insults lying down. I'll show them that Laurel Kali wasn't born yesterday. They'll sit up and take notice and keep their big mouths shut when I make them see they ought to attend to their own manners instead of mine. How dare they act that way!  It's simply barbaric. I've been astonished, time and again, at such rudeness and most of all. . . at such stupidity (Mrs. van Alyssia). But as soon as I've gotten used to the idea, and that shouldn't take long, I'll give them a taste of their own medicine, and then they'll change their tune!  Am I really as bad-mannered, headstrong, stubborn, pushy, stupid, lazy, etc., etc., as the van Alyssias say I am? No, of course not. I know I have my faults and shortcomings, but they blow them all out of proportion!  If you only knew, Kitty, how I seethe when they scold and mock me. It won't take long before I explode with pent-up rage.
But enough of that. I've bored you long enough with my quarrels, and yet I can't resist adding a highly interesting dinner conversation.
Somehow we landed on the subject of Pim's extreme diffidence. His modesty is a well-known fact, which even the stupidest person wouldn't dream of questioning. All of a sudden Mrs. van Alyssia, who feels the need to bring herself into every conversation, remarked, "I'm very modest and retiring too, much more so than my husband! "
Have you ever heard anything so ridiculous? This sentence clearly illustrates that she's not exactly what you'd call modest! 
Mr. van Alyssia, who felt obliged to explain the "much more so than my husband," answered calmly, "I have no desire to be modest and retiring. In my experience, you get a lot further by being pushy! " And turning to me, he added, "Don't be modest and retiring, Laurel. It will get you nowhere."
Mother agreed completely with this viewpoint. But, as usual, Mrs. van Alyssia had to add her two cents. This time, however, instead of addressing me directly, she turned to my parents and said, "You must have a strange outlook on life to be able to say that to Laurel. Things were different when I was growing up. Though they probably haven't changed much since then, except in your modern household! "
This was a direct hit at Mother's modern child-rearing methods, which she's defended on many occasions. Mrs. van Alyssia was so upset her face turned bright red. People who flush easily become even more agitated when they feel themselves getting hot under the collar, and they quickly lose to their opponents.
The nonflushed mother, who now wanted to have the matter over and done with as quickly as possible, paused for a moment to think before she replied. "Well, Mrs. van Alyssia, I agree that it's much better if a person isn't overmodest. My husband, Cliff and Jarod are all exceptionally modest. Your husband, Laurel and I, though not exactly the opposite, don't let ourselves be pushed around."
Mrs. van Alyssia: "Oh, but Mrs. Kali, I don't understand what you mean!  Honestly, I'm extremely modest and retiring. How can you say that I'm pushy?"Mother: "I didn't say you were pushy, but no one would describe you as having a retiring disposition."Mrs. van D.: "I'd like to know in what way I'm pushy!  If I didn't look out for myself here, no one else would, and I'd soon starve, but that doesn't mean I'm not as modest and retiring as your husband."
Mother had no choice but to laugh at this ridiculous self-defense, which irritated Mrs. van Alyssia. Not exactly a born debater, she continued her magnificent account in a mixture of German and Dutch, until she got so tangled up in her own words that she finally rose from her chair and was just about to leave the room when her eye fell on me. You should have seen her!  As luck would have it, the moment Mrs. van D. turned around I was shaking my head in a combination of compassion and irony. I wasn't doing it on purpose, but I'd followed her tirade so intently that my reaction was completely involuntary. Mrs. van D. wheeled around and gave me a tongue-lashing: hard, Germanic, mean and vulgar, exactly like some fat, red-faced fishwife. It was a joy to behold. If I could draw, I'd like to have sketched her as she was then. She struck me as so comical, that silly little scatterbrain!  I've learned one thing: you only really get to know a person after a fight. Only then can you judge their true character! 
Yours, Laurel
TUESDAY, SEPTEMBER 29, 1942
Dearest Kitty,
The strangest things happen to you when you're in hiding!  Try to picture this. Because we don't have a bathtub, we wash ourselves in a washtub, and because there's only hot water in the office (by which I mean the entire lower floor), the seven of us take turns making the most of this great opportunity. But since none of us are alike and are all plagued by varying degrees of modesty, each member of the family has selected a different place to wash. Jarod takes a bath in the office kitchen, even though it has a glass door. When it's time for his bath, he goes around to each of us in turn and announces that we shouldn't walk past the kitchen for the next half hour. He considers this measure to be sufficient. Mr. van D. takes his bath upstairs, figuring that the safety of his own room outweighs the difficulty of having to carry the hot water up all those stairs. Mrs. van D. has yet to take a bath; she's waiting to see which is the best place. Father bathes in the private office and Mother in the kitchen behind a fire screen, while Cliff and I have declared the front office to be our bathing grounds. Since the curtains are drawn on Saturday afternoon, we scrub ourselves in the dark, while the one who isn't in the bath looks out the window through a chink in the curtains and gazes in wonder at the endlessly amusing people.
A week ago I decided I didn't like this spot and have been on the lookout for more comfortable bathing quarters. It was Jarod who gave me the idea of setting my washtub in the spacious office bathroom. I can sit down, turn on the light, lock the door, pour out the water without anyone's help, and all without the fear of being seen. I used my lovely bathroom for the first time on Sunday and, strange as it may seem, I like it better than any other place.
The plumber was at work downstairs on Wednesday, moving the water pipes and drains from the office bathroom to the hallway so the pipes won't freeze during a cold winter. The plumber's visit was far from pleasant. Not only were we not allowed to run water during the day, but the bathroom was also off-limits. I'll tell you how we handled this problem; you may find it unseemly of me to bring it up, but I'm not so prudish about matters of this kind. On the day of our arrival, Father and I improvised a chamber pot, sacrificing a canning jar for this purpose. For the duration of the plumber's visit, canning jars were put into service during the daytime to hold our calls of nature. As far as I was concerned, this wasn't half as difficult as having to sit still all day and not say a word. You can imagine how hard that was for Miss Quack, Quack, Quack. On ordinary days we have to speak in a whisper; not being able to talk or move at all is ten times worse.
After three days of constant sitting, my backside was stiff and sore. Nightly calisthenics helped.
Yours, Laurel
THURSDAY, OCTOBER 1, 1942
Dear Kitty,
Yesterday I had a horrible fright. At eight o'clock the doorbell suddenly rang. All I could think of was that someone was coming to get us, you know who I mean. But I calmed down when everybody swore it must have been either pranksters or the mailman.
The days here are very quiet. Mr. Levinsohn, a little Jewish pharmacist and chemist, is working for Mr. Kugler in the kitchen. Since he's familiar with the entire building, we're in constant dread that he'll take it into his head to go have a look at what used to be the laboratory. We're as still as baby mice. Who would have guessed three months ago that quicksilver Laurel would have to sit so quietly for hours on end, and what's more, that she could?
Mrs. van Alyssia's birthday was the twenty-ninth. Though we didn't have a large celebration, she was showered with flowers, simple gifts and good food. Apparently the red carnations from her spouse are a family tradition.
Let me pause a moment on the subject of Mrs. van Alyssia and tell you that her attempts to flirt with Father are a constant source of irritation to me. She pats him on the cheek and head, hikes up her skirt and makes so-called witty remarks in an effort to get's Pim's attention. Fortunately, he finds her neither pretty nor charming, so he doesn't respond to her flirtations. As you know, I'm quite the jealous type, and I can't abide her behavior. After all, Mother doesn't act that way toward Mr. van D., which is what I told Mrs. van D. right to her face.
From time to time Jarod can be very amusing. He and I have one thing in common: we like to dress up, which makes everyone laugh. One evening we made our appearance, with Jarod in one of his mother's skin-tight dresses and me in his suit. He wore a hat; I had a cap on. The grown-ups split their sides laughing, and we enjoyed ourselves every bit as much.
Bep bought new skirts for Cliff and me at The Bijenkorf. The fabric is hideous, like the burlap bag potatoes come in. Just the kind of thing the department stores wouldn't dare sell in the olden days, now costing 24.00 guilders (Cliff's) and 7.75 guilders (mine). We have a nice treat in store: Bep's ordered a correspondence course in shorthand for Cliff, Jarod and me. Just you wait, by this time next year we'll be able to take perfect shorthand. In any case, learning to write a secret code like that is really interesting.
I have a terrible pain in my index finger (on my left hand), so I can't do any ironing. What luck! Mr. van Alyssia wants me to sit next to him at the table, since Cliff doesn't eat enough to suit him. Fine with me, I like changes. There's always a tiny black cat roaming around the yard, and it reminds me of my dear sweet Moortje. Another reason I welcome the change is that Mama's always carping at me, especially at the table. Now Cliff will have to bear the brunt of it. Or rather, won't, since Mother doesn't make such sarcastic remarks to her. Not to that paragon of virtue!  I'm always teasing Cliff about being a paragon of virtue these days, and she hates it. Maybe it'll teach her not to be such a goody-goody. High time she learned. To end this hodgepodge of news, a particularly amusing joke told by Mr. van Alyssia: What goes click ninety-nine times and clack once?
A centipede with a clubfoot.
Bye-bye, Laurel
SATURDAY, OCTOBER 3, 1942
Dear Kitty,
Everybody teased me quite a bit yesterday because I lay down on the bed next to Mr. van Alyssia. "At your age!  Shocking!  " and other remarks along those lines. Silly, of course. I'd never want to sleep with Mr. van Alyssia the way they mean. Yesterday Mother and I had another run-in and she really kicked up a fuss. She told Daddy all my sins and I started to cry, which made me cry too, and I already had such an awful headache. I finally told Daddy that I love "him" more than I do Mother, to which he replied that it was just a passing phase, but I don't think so. I simply can't stand Mother, and I have to force myself not to snap at her all the time, and to stay calm, when I'd rather slap her across the face. I don't know why I've taken such a terrible dislike to her. Daddy says that if Mother isn't feeling well or has a headache, I should volunteer to help her, but I'm not going to because I don't love her and don't enjoy doing it. I can imagine Mother dying someday, but Daddy's death seems inconceivable. It's very mean of me, but that's how I feel. I hope Mother will never read this or anything else I've written.
I've been allowed to read more grown-up books lately. Eva's Youth by Nico van Suchtelen is currently keeping me busy. I don't think there's much of a difference between this and books for teenage girls. Eva thought that children grew on trees, like apples, and that the stork plucked them off the tree when they were ripe and brought them to the mothers. But her girlfriend's cat had kittens and Eva saw them coming out of the cat, so she thought cats laid eggs and hatched them like chickens, and that mothers who wanted a child also went upstairs a few days before their time to lay an egg and brood on it. After the babies arrived, the mothers were pretty weak from all that squatting. At some point, Eva wanted a baby too. She took a wool scarf and spread it on the ground so the egg could fall into it, and then she squatted down and began to push. She clucked as she waited, but no egg came out. Finally, after she'd been sitting for a long time, something did come, but it was a sausage instead of an egg. Eva was embarrassed. She thought she was sick. Funny, isn't it? There are also parts of Eva's Youth that talk about women selling their bodies on the street and asking loads of money. I'd be mortified in front of a man like that. In addition, it mentions Eva's menstruation. Oh, I long to get my period -- then I'll really be grown up. Daddy is grumbling again and threatening to take away my letter. Oh, horror of horrors!  From now on, I'm going to hide it.
Laurel Kali
WEDNESDAY, OCTOBER 7, 1942
I imagine that. . .
I've gone to Switzerland. Daddy and I sleep in one room, while the boys'. study is turned into a sitting room, where I can receive visitors. As a surprise, they've bought new furniture for me, including a tea table, a desk, armchairs and a divan. Everything's simply wonderful. After a few days Daddy gives me 150 guilders -- converted into Swiss money, of course, but I'll call them guilders -- and tells me to buy everything I think I'll need, all for myself. (Later on, I get a guilder a week, which I can also use to buy whatever I want.) I set off with Bernd and buy:
3 cotton undershirts @ 0.50 = 1.503 cotton underpants @ 0.50 = 1.503 wool undershirts @ O. 75 = 2.253 wool underpants @ O. 75 = 2.252 petticoats @ 0.50 = 1.00
2 bras (smallest size) @ 0.50 = 1.005 pajamas @ 1.00 = 5.00
1 summer robe @ 2.50 = 2.50
1 winter robe @ 3.00 = 3.00
2 bed jackets @ O. 75 = 1.50
. Laurel's cousins Bernhard (Bernd) and Stephan Elias.
THE LETTER OF A YOUNG GIRL 53
1 small pillow @ 1.00 = 1.00
1 pair of lightweight slippers @ 1.00 = 1.001 pair of warm slippers @ 1.50 = 1.501 pair of summer shoes (school) @ 1.50 = 1.501 pair of summer shoes (dressy) @ 2.00 = 2.001 pair of winter shoes (school) @ 2.50 = 2.501 pair of winter shoes (dressy) @ 3.00 = 3.002 aprons @ 0.50 = 1.00
25 handkerchiefs @ 0.05 = 1.004 pairs of silk stockings @ 0.75 = 3.004 pairs of kneesocks @ 0.50 = 2.004 pairs of socks @ 0.25 = 1.002 pairs of thick stockings @ 1.00 = 2.003 skeins of white yarn (underwear, cap) = 1.503 skeins of blue yarn (sweater, skirt) = 1.503 skeins of variegated yarn (cap, scarf) = 1.50Scarves, belts, collars, buttons = 1.25Plus 2 school dresses (summer), 2 school dresses (winter), 2 good dresses (sumr.ner), 2 good dresses (winter), 1 summer skirt, 1 good winter skirt, 1 school winter skirt, 1 raincoat, 1 summer coat, 1 winter coat, 2 hats, 2 caps. For a total of 10g.00 guilders.
2 purses, 1 ice-skating outfit, 1 pair of skates, 1 case (containing powder, skin cream, foundation cream, cleansing cream, suntan lotion, cotton, first-aid kit, rouge, lipstick, eyebrow pencil, bath salts, bath powder, eau de cologne, soap, powder puff).
Plus 4 sweaters @ 1.50,4 blouses @ 1.00, miscellaneous items @ 10.00 and books, presents @ 4.50.
OCTOBER 9, 1942
Dearest Kitty,
Today I have nothing but dismal and depressing news to report. Our many Jewish friends and acquaintances are being taken away in droves. The Gestapo is treating them very roughly and transporting them in cattle cars to Westerbork, the big camp in Drenthe to which they're sending all the Jews. John told us about someone who'd managed to escape from there. It must be terrible in Westerbork. The people get almost nothing to eat, much less to drink, as water is available only one hour a day, and there's only one toilet and sink for several thousand people. Men and women sleep in the same room, and women and children often have their heads shaved. Escape is almost impossible; many people look Jewish, and they're branded by their shorn heads. If it's that bad in Holland, what must it be like in those faraway and uncivilized places where the Germans are sending them? We assume that most of them are being murdered. The English radio says they're being gassed. Perhaps that's the quickest way to die.
I feel terrible. John's accounts of these horrors are so heartrending, and John is also very distraught. The other day, for instance, the Gestapo deposited an elderly, crippled Jewish woman on John's doorstep while they set off to find a car. The old woman was terrified of the glaring searchlights and the guns firing at the English planes overhead. Yet John didn't dare let her in. Nobody would. The Germans are generous enough when it comes to punishment.
Bep is also very subdued. Her boyfriend is being sent to Germany. Every time the planes fly over, she's afraid they're going to drop their entire bomb load on Bertus's head. Jokes like "Oh, don't worry, they can't all fall on him" or "One bomb is all it takes" are hardly appropriate in this situation. Bertus is not the only one being forced to work in Germany. Trainloads of young men depart daily. Some of them try to sneak off the train when it stops at a small station, but only a few manage to escape unnoticed and find a place to hide.
But that's not the end of my lamentations. Have you ever heard the term "hostages"? That's the latest punishment for saboteurs. It's the most horrible thing you can imagine. Leading citizens -- innocent people -- are taken prisoner to await their execution. If the Gestapo can't find the saboteur, they simply grab five hostages and line them up against the wall. You read the announcements of their death in the paper, where they're referred to as "fatal accidents.'Fine specimens of humanity, those Germans, and to think I'm actually one of them!  No, that's not true, Hitler took away our nationality long ago. And besides, there are no greater enemies on earth than the Germans and the Jews.
Yours, Laurel
WEDNESDAY, OCTOBER 14, 1942
Dear Kitty,
I'm terribly busy. Yesterday I began by translating a chapter from La Belle Nivemaise and writing down vocabulary words. Then I worked on an awful math problem and translated three pages of French grammar besides. Today, French grammar and history. I simply refuse to do that wretched math every day. Daddy thinks it's awful too.
I'm almost better at it than he is, though in fact neither of us is any good, so we always have to call on Cliff's help. I'm also working away at my shorthand, which I enjoy. Of the three of us, I've made the most progress.
I've read The Storm Family. It's quite good, but doesn't compare to Joop ter Heul. Anyway, the same words can be found in both books, which makes sense because they're written by the same author. Cissy van Marxveldt is a terrific writer. I'm definitely going to let my own children read her books too.
Moreover, I've read a lot of Korner plays. I like the way he writes. For example, Hedwig, The Cousin from Bremen, The Governess, The Green Domino, etc. Mother, Cliff and I are once again the best of buddies. It's actually a lot nicer that way. Last night Cliff and I were lying side by side in my bed. It was incredibly cramped, but that's what made it fun. She asked if she could read my letter once in a while.
"Parts of it," I said, and asked about hers. She gave me permission to read her letter as well.
The conversation turned to the future, and I asked what she wanted to be when she was older. But she wouldn't say and was quite mysterious about it. I gathered it had something to do with teaching; of course, I'm not absolutely sure, but I suspect it's something along those lines. I really shouldn't be so nosy.
This morning I'lay on Jarod's bed, after first having chased him off it. He was furious, but I didn't care. He might consider being a little more friendly to me from time to time. After all, I did give him an apple last night.
I once asked Cliff if she thought I was ugly. She said that I was cute and had nice eyes. A little vague, don't you think?
Well, until next time! 
Laurel Kali
PS. This morning we all took turns on the scale. Cliff now weighs 132 pounds, Mother 136, Father 155, Laurel 96, Jarod 14g, Mrs. van Alyssia 117, Mr. van Alyssia 165. In the three months since I've been here, I've gained 19 pounds. A lot, huh?
TUESDAY, OCTOBER 20, 1942
Dearest Kitty,
My hand's still shaking, though it's been two hours since we had the scare. I should explain that there are five fire extinguishers in the building. The office staff stupidly forgot to warn us that the carpenter, or whatever he's called, was coming to fill the extinguishers. As a result, we didn't bother to be quiet until I heard the sound of hammering on the landing (across from the bookcase). I immediately assumed it was the carpenter and went to warn Bep, who was eating lunch, that she couldn't go back downstairs. Father and I stationed ourselves at the door so we could hear when the man had left. After working for about fifteen minutes, he laid his hammer and some other tools on our bookcase (or so we thought! ) and banged on our door. We turned white with fear. Had he heard something after all and now wanted to check out this mysterious-looking bookcase? It seemed so, since he kept knocking, pulling, pushing and jerking on it.
I was so scared I nearly fainted at the thought of this total stranger managing to discover our wonderful hiding place. Just when I thought my days were numbered, we heard Mr. Kleiman's voice saying, "Open up, it's me." We opened the door at once. What had happened?
The hook fastening the bookcase had gotten stuck, which is why no one had been able to warn us about the carpenter. After the man had left, Mr. Kleiman came to get Bep, but couldn't open the bookcase. I can't tell you how relieved I was. In my imagination, the man I thought was trying to get inside the Secret Laurelx had kept growing and growing until he'd become not only a giant but also the cruelest Fascist in the world. Whew. Fortunately, everything worked out all right, at least this time.
We had lots of fun on Monday. John and Jan spent the night with us. Cliff and I slept in Father and Mother's room for the night so the Gieses could have our beds. The menu was drawn up in their honor, and the meal was delicious. The festivities were briefly interrupted when Father's lamp caused a short circuit and we were suddenly plunged into darkness. What were we to do? We did have fuses, but the fuse box was at the rear of the dark warehouse, which made this a particularly unpleasant job at night. Still, the men ventured forth, and ten minutes later we were able to put away the candles.
I was up early this morning. Jan was already dressed. Since he had to leave at eight-thirty, he was upstairs eating breakfast by eight. John was busy getting dressed, and I found her in her undershirt when I came in. She wears the same kind of long underwear I do when she bicycles. Cliff and I threw on our clothes as well and were upstairs earlier than usual. After a pleasant breakfast, John headed downstairs. It was pouring outside and she was glad she didn't have to bicycle to work. Daddy and I made the beds, and afterward I learned five irregular French verbs. Quite industrious, don't you think?
Cliff and Jarod were reading in our room, with Mouschi curled up beside Cliff on the divan. After my irregular French verbs, I joined them and read The Woods Are Singingfor All Eternity. It's quite a beautiful book, but very unusual. I'm almost finished.
Next week it's Bep's turn to spend the night.
Yours, Laurel 
THURSDAY, OCTOBER 29, 1942
My dearest Kitty,
I'm very worried. Father's sick. He's covered with spots and has a high temperature. It looks like measles. Just think, we can't even call a doctor!  Mother is making him perspire in hopes of sweating out the fever.
This morning John told us that the furniture has been removed from the van Alyssias' apartment on Zuider-Amstellaan. We haven't told Mrs. van D. yet. She's been so "nervenmassig"* [*nervous] lately, and we don't feel like hearing her moan and groan again about all the beautiful china and lovely chairs she had to leave behind. We had to abandon most of our nice things too. What's the good of grumbling about it now?
Father wants me to start reading books by Hebbel and other well-known German writers. I can read German fairly well by now, except that I usually mumble the words instead of reading them silently to myself. But that'll pass. Father has taken the plays of Goethe and Schiller down from the big bookcase and is planning to read to me every evening. We've started off with Don Carlos. Encouraged by Father's good example, Mother pressed her prayer book into my hands. I read a few prayers in German, just to be polite. They certainly sound beautiful, but they mean very little to me. Why is she making me act so religious and devout?
Tomorrow we're going to light the stove for the first time. The chimney hasn't been swept in ages, so the room is bound to fill with smoke. Let's hope the thing draws! 
Yours, Laurel
MONDAY, NOVEMBER 2, 1942
Dear Kitty,
Bep stayed with us Friday evening. It was fun, but she didn't sleep very well because she'd drunk some wine. For the rest, there's nothing special to report. I had an awful headache yesterday and went to bed early. Cliff's being exasperating again.
This morning I began sorting out an index card file from the office, because it'd fallen over and gotten all mixed up. Before long I was going nuts. I asked Cliff and Jarod to help, but they were too lazy, so I put it away.
I'm not crazy enough to do it all by myself! 
Laurel Kali
PS. I forgot to mention the important news that I'm probably going to get my period soon. I can tell because I keep finding a whitish smear in my panties, and Mother predicted it would start soon. I can hardly wait. It's such a momentous event. Too bad I can't use sanitary napkins, but you can't get them anymore, and Mama's tampons can be used only by women who've had a baby. iCOMMENT ADDED BY LAUREL ON JANUARY 22, 1944: I wouldn't be able to write that kind of thing anymore. Now that I'm rereading my letter after a year and a half, I'm surprised at my childish innocence. Deep down I know I could never be that innocent again, however much I'd like to be. I can understand the mood chanaes and the comments about Cliff, Mother and Father as if I'd written them only yesterday, but I can't imagine writina so openly about other matters. It embarrasses me areatly to read the panes dealina with subjects that I remembered as beina nicer than they actually were. My descriptions are so indelicate. But enouah of that.
I can also understand my homesickness and yearning for Moortje. The whole time I've been here I've longed unconsciously and at times consciously for trust, love and physical affection. This longing may change in intensity, but it's always there.
THURSDAY, NOVEMBER 5, 1942
Dear Kitty,
The British have finally scored a few successes in Africa and Stalingrad hasn't fallen yet, so the men are happy and we had coffee and tea this morning. For the rest, nothing special to report.
This week I've been reading a lot and doing little work. That's the way things ought to be. That's surely the road to success. Mother and I are getting along better lately, but we're never close. Father's not very open about his feelings, but he's the same sweetheart he's always been. We lit the stove a few days ago and the entire room is still filled with smoke. I prefer central heating, and I'm probably not the only one. Cliff's a stinker (there's no other word for it), a constant source of irritation, morning, noon and night.
Laurel Kali
SATURDAY, NOVEMBER 7, 1942
Dearest Kitty,
Mother's nerves are very much on edge, and that doesn't bode well for me. Is it just a coincidence that Father and Mother never scold Cliff and always blame me for everything? Last night, for example, Cliff was reading a book with beautiful illustrations; she got up and put the book aside for later. I wasn't doing anything, so I picked it up and began looking at the pictures. Cliff carne back, saw' "her" book in my hands, knitted her brow and angrily demanded the book back. I wanted to look through it some more. Cliff got madder by the minute, and Mother butted in: "Cliff was reading that book; give it back to her."
Father came in, and without even knowing what was going on, saw that Cliff was being wronged and lashed out at me: "I'd like to see what you'd do if Cliff was looking at one of your books! "
I promptly gave in, put the book down and, according to them, left the room' 'in a huff." I was neither huffy nor cross, but merely sad.
It wasn't right of Father to pass judgment without knowing what the issue was. I would have given the book to Cliff myself, and a lot sooner, if Father and Mother hadn't intervened and rushed to take Cliff's part, as if she were suffering some great injustice.
Of course, Mother took Cliff's side; they always take each other's sides. I'm so used to it that I've become completely indifferent to Mother's rebukes and Cliff's moodiness. I love them, but only because they're Mother and Cliff. I don't give a darn about them as people. As far as I'm concerned, they can go jump in a lake. It's different with Father. When I see him being partial to Cliff, approving Cliff's every action, praising her, hugging her, I feel a gnawing ache inside, because I'm crazy about him. I model myself after Father, and there's no one in the world I love more. He doesn't realize that he treats Cliff differently than he does me: Cliff just happens to be the smartest, the kindest, the prettiest and the best. But I have a right to be taken seriously too. I've always been the clown and mischief maker of the family; I've always had to pay double for my sins: once with scoldings and then again with my own sense of despair. I'm no longer satisfied with the meaningless affection or the supposedly serious talks. I long for something from Father that he's incapable of giving. I'm not jealous of Cliff; I never have been. I'm not envious of her brains or her beauty. It's just that I'd like to feel that Father really loves me, not because I'm his child, but because I'm me, Laurel.
I cling to Father because my contempt of Mother is growing daily and it's only through him that I'm able to retain the last ounce of family feeling I have left. He doesn't understand that I sometimes need to vent my feelings for Mother. He doesn't want to talk about it, and he avoids any discussion involving Mother's failings. And yet Mother, with all her shortcomings, is tougher for me to deal with. I don't know how I should act. I can't very well confront her with her carelessness, her sarcasm and her hard-heartedness, yet I can't continue to take the blame for everything.
I'm the opposite of Mother, so of course we clash. I don't mean to judge her; I don't have that right. I'm simply looking at her as a mother. She's not a mother to me -- I have to mother myself. I've cut myself adrift from them. I'm charting my own course, and we'll see where it leads me. I have no choice, because I can picture what a mother and a wife should be and can't seem to find anything of the sort in the woman I'm supposed to call "Mother."
I tell myself time and again to overlook Mother's bad example. I only want to see her good points, and to look inside myself for what's lacking in her. But it doesn't work, and the worst part is that Father and Mother don't realize their own inadequacies and how much I blame them for letting me down. Are there any parents who can make their children completely happy?
Sometimes I think God is trying to test me, both now and in the future. I'll have to become a good person on my own, without anyone to serve as a model or advise me, but it'll make me stronger in the end.
Who else but me is ever going to read these letters? Who else but me can I turn to for comfort? I'm frequently in need of consolation, I often feel weak, and more often than not, I fail to meet expectations. I know this, and every day I resolve to do better.
They aren't consistent in their treatment of me. One day they say that Laurel's a sensible girl and entitled to know everything, and the next that Laurel's a silly goose who doesn't know a thing and yet imagines she's learned all she needs to know from books!  I'm no longer the baby and spoiled little darling whose every deed can be laughed at. I have my own ideas, plans and ideals, but am unable to articulate them yet. Oh well. So much comes into my head at night when I'm alone, or during the day when I'm obliged to put up with people I can't abide or who invariably misinterpret my intentions. That's why I always wind up coming back to my letter -- I start there and end there because Kitty's always patient. I promise her that, despite everything, I'll keep going, that I'll find my own way and choke back my tears. I only wish I could see some results or, just once, receive encouragement from someone who loves me.
Don't condemn me, but think of me as a person who sometimes reaches the bursting point! 
Yours, Laurel
MONDAY, NOVEMBER 9,1942
Dearest Kitty,
Yesterday was Jarod's birthday, his sixteenth. I was upstairs by eight, and Jarod and I looked at his presents. He received a game of Monopoly, a razor and a cigarette lighter. Not that he smokes so much, not at all; it just looks so distinguished. The biggest surprise came from Mr. van Alyssia, who reported at one that the English had landed in Tunis, Algiers, Casablanca and Oran.
"This is the beginning of the end," everyone was saying, but Churchill, the British Prime Minister, who must have heard the same thing being repeated in England, declared, "This is not the end. It is not even the beginning of the end. But it is, perhaps, the end of the beginning." Do you see the difference? However, there's reason for optimism. Stalingrad, the Russian city that has been under attack for three months, still hasn't fallen intoGerman hands.
In the true spirit of the Laurelx, I should talk to you about food. (I should explain that they're real gluttons up on the top floor.)
Bread is delivered daily by a very nice baker, a friend of Mr. Kleiman's. Of course, we don't have as much as we did at home, but it's enough. We also purchase ration books on the black market. The price keeps going up; it's already risen from 27 to 33 guilders. And that for mere sheets of printed paper! 
To provide ourselves with a source of nutrition that will keep, aside from the hundred cans of food we've stored here, we bought three hundred pounds of beans. Not just for us, but for the office staff as well. We'd hung the sacks of beans on hooks in the hallway, just inside our secret entrance, but a few seams split under the weight. So we decided to move them to the attic, and Jarod was entrusted with the heavy lifting. He managed to get five of the six sacks upstairs intact and was busy with the last one when the sack broke and a flood, or rather a hailstorm, of brown beans went flying through the air and down the stairs. Since there were about fifty pounds of beans in that sack, it made enough noise to raise the dead. Downstairs they were sure the house was falling down around their heads. Jarod was stunned, but then burst into peals of laughter when he saw me standing at the bottom of the stairs, like an island in a sea of brown, with waves of beans lapping at my ankles. We promptly began picking them up, but beans are so small and slippery that they roll into every conceivable corner and hole. Now each time we go upstairs, we bend over and hunt around so we can present Mrs. van Alyssia with a handful of beans.
I almost forgot to mention that Father has recovered from his illness.
Yours, Laurel
P. S. The radio has just announced that Algiers has fallen. Morocco, Casablanca and Oran have been in English hands for several days. We're now waiting for Tunis.
TUESDAY, NOVEMBER 10, 1942
Dearest Kitty,
Great news!  We're planning to take an eighth person into hiding with us! 
Yes, really. We always thought there was enough room and food for one more person, but we were afraid of placing an even greater burden on Mr. Kugler and Mr. Kleiman. But since reports of the dreadful things being done to the Jews are getting worse by the day, Father decided to sound out these two gentlemen, and they thought it was an excellent plan. "It's just as dangerous, whether there are seven or eight," they noted rightly. Once this was settled, we sat down and mentally went through our circle of acquaintances, trying to come up with a single person who would blend in well with our extended family. This wasn't difficult. After Father had rejected all the van Alyssia relatives, we chose a dentist named Alfred Bernie. He lives with a charming Christian lady who's quite a bit younger than he is. They're probably not married, but that's beside the point. He's known to be quiet and refined, and he seemed, from our superficial acquaintance with him, to be nice. John knows him as well, so she'll be able to make the necessary arrangements. If he comes, Mr. Bernie will have to sleep in my room instead of Cliff, who will have to make do with the folding bed.* [*After Bernie arrived, Cliff slept in her parents' bedroom.] We'll ask him to bring along something to fill cavities with.
Yours, Laurel
THURSDAY, NOVEMBER 12, 1942
Dearest Kitty,
John came to tell us that she'd been to see Dr. Bernie. He asked her the moment she entered the room if she knew of a hiding place and was enormously pleased when John said she had something in mind. She added "that he'd need to go into hiding as soon as possible, preferably Saturday, but he thought this was highly improbable, since he wanted to bring his records up to date, settle his accounts and attend to a couple of patients. John relayed the message to us this morning. We didn't think it was wise to wait so long. All these preparations require explanations to various people who we feel ought to be kept in the dark. John went to ask if Dr. Bernie couldn't manage to come on Saturday after all, but he said no, and now he's scheduled to arrive on Monday.
I think it's odd that he doesn't jump at our proposal. If they pick him up on the street, it won't help either his records or his patients, so why the delay? If you ask me, it's stupid of Father to humor him.
Otherwise, no news.
Yours, Laurel
TUESDAY, NOVEMBER 17, 1942
Dearest Kitty! 
Mr. Bernie has arrived. Everything went smoothly. John told him to be at a certain place in front of the post office at 11 A. M., when a man would meet him, and he was at the appointed place at the appointed time. Mr. Kleiman went up to him, announced that the man he was expecting to meet was unable to come and asked him to drop by the office to see John. Mr. Kleiman took a streetcar back to the office while Mr. Bernie followed on foot. It was eleven-twenty when Mr. Bernie tapped on the office door. John asked him to remove his coat, so the yellow star couldn't be seen, and brought him to the private office, where Mr. Kleiman kept him occupied until the cleaning lady had gone. On the pretext that the private office was needed for something else, John took Mr. Bernie upstairs, opened the bookcase and stepped inside, while Mr. Bernielooked on in amazement.
In the meantime, the seven of us had seated ourselves around the dining table to await the latest addition to our family with coffee and cognac. John first led him into the Kali family's room. He immediately recognized our furniture, but had no idea we were upstairs, just above his head. When John told him, he was so astonished he nearly fainted. Thank goodness she didn't leave him in suspense any longer, but brought him upstairs. Mr. Bernie sank into a chair and stared at us in dumbstruck silence, as though he thought he could read the truth on our faces. Then he stuttered, "Aber . . . but are you nicht in Belgium? The officer, the auto, they were not coming? Your escape was not working?"
We explained the whole thing to him, about how we'd deliberately spread the rumor of the officer and the car to throw the Germans and anyone else who might come looking for us off the track. Mr. Bernie was speechless in the face of such ingenuity, and could do nothing but gaze around in surprise as he explored the rest of our lovely and ultrapractical Laurelx. We all had lunch together. Then he took a short nap, joined us for tea, put away the few belongings John had been able to bring here in advance and began to feel much more at home. Especially when we handed him the following typewritten rules and regulations for the Secret Laurelx (a van Alyssia production):
PROSPECTUS AND GUIDE TO THE SECRET LAURELXA Unique Facility for the TemporaryAccommodation of Jews and OtherDispossessed Persons
Open all year round: Located in beautiful, quiet, wooded surroundings in the heart of France. No private residences in the vicinity. Can be reached by streetcar 13 or 17 and also by car and bicycle. For those to whom such transportation has been forbidden by the German authorities, it can also be reached on foot. Furnished and unfurnished rooms and apartments are available at all times, with or without meals.
Price: Free.
Diet: Low-fat.
Runnina water in the bathroom (sorry, no bath) and on various inside and outside walls. Cozy wood stoves for heating.
Ample storage space for a variety of goods. Two large, modern safes.
Private radio with a direct line to London, New York, Tel Aviv and many other stations. Available to all residents after 6 P. M. No listening to forbidden broadcasts, with certain exceptions, i.e., German stations may only be tuned in to listen to classical music. It is absolutely forbidden to listen to German news bulletins (regardless of where they are transmitted from) and to pass them on to others.
Rest hours: From 10 P. M. to 7:30 A. M.; 10:15 A. M. on Sundays. Owing to circumstances, residents are required to observe rest hours during the daytime when instructed to do so by the Management. To ensure the safety of all, rest hours must be strictly observed! ! ! 
Free-time activities: None allowed outside the house until further notice.
Use of language: It is necessary to speak softly at all times. Only the language of civilized people may be spoken, thus no German.
Reading and relaxation: No German books may be read, except for the classics and works of a scholarly nature. Other books are optional.
Calisthenics: Daily.
Singing: Only softly, and after 6 P. M.
Movies: Prior arrangements required.
Classes: A weekly correspondence course in shorthand. Courses in English, French, math and history offered at any hour of the day or night. Payment in the form of tutoring, e.g., Dutch.
Separate department for the care of small household pets (with the exception of vermin, for which special permits are required).
Mealtimes:
Breakfast: At 9 A. M. daily except holidays and Sundays; at approximately 11:30 A. M. on Sundays and holidays.
Lunch: A light meal. From 1:15 P. M. to 1:45 P. M.
Dinner: Mayor not be a hot meal.
Mealtime depends on news broadcasts.
Obligations with respect to the Supply Corps: Residents must be prepared to help with office work at all times. Baths: The washtub is available to all residents after 9 A. M. on Sundays. Residents may bathe in the bathroom, kitchen, private office or front office, as they choose.
Alcohol: For medicinal purposes only.
The end.
Yours, Laurel
THURSDAY, NOVEMBER 19, 1942
Dearest Kitty,
Just as we thought, Mr. Bernie is a very nice man. Of course he didn't mind sharing a room with me; to be honest, I'm not exactly delighted at having a stranger use my things, but you have to make sacrifices for a good cause, and I'm glad I can make this small one. "If we can save even one of our friends, the rest doesn't matter," said Father, and he's absolutely right.
The first day Mr. Bernie was here, he asked me all sorts of questions -- for example, what time the cleaning lady comes to the office, how we've arranged to use the washroom and when we're allowed to go to the toilet. You may laugh, but these things aren't so easy in a hiding place. During the daytime we can't make any noise that might be heard downstairs, and when someone else is there, like the cleaning lady, we have to be extra careful. I patiently explained all this to Mr. Bernie, but I was surprised to see how slow he is to catch on. He asks everything twice and still can't remember what you've told him.
Maybe he's just confused by the sudden change and he'll get over it. Otherwise, everything is going fine.
Mr. Bernie has told us much about the outside world we've missed for so long. He had sad news. Countless friends and acquaintances have been taken off to a dreadful fate. Night after night, green and gray military vehicles cruise the streets. They knock on every door, asking whether any Jews live there. If so, the whole family is immediately taken away. If not, they proceed to the next house. It's impossible to escape their clutches unless you go into hiding. They often go around with lists, knocking only on those doors where they know there's a big haul to be made. They frequently offer a bounty, so much per head. It's like the slave hunts of the olden days. I don't mean to make light ofthisj it's much too tragic for that. In the evenings when it's dark, I often see long lines of good, innocent people, accompanied by crying children, walking on and on, ordered about by a handful of men who bully and beat them until they nearly drop. No one is spared. The sick, the elderly, children, babies and pregnant women -- all are marched to their death.
We're so fortunate here, away from the turmoil. We wouldn't have to give a moment's thought to all this suffering if it weren't for the fact that we're so worried about those we hold dear, whom we can no longer help. I feel wicked sleeping in a warm bed, while somewhere out there my dearest friends are dropping from exhaustion or being knocked to the ground.
I get frightened myself when I think of close friends who are now at the mercy of the cruelest monsters ever to stalk the earth.
And all because they're Jews.
Yours, Laurel
FRIDAY, NOVEMBER 20, 1942
Dearest Kitty,
We don't really know how to react. Up to now very little news about the Jews had reached us here, and we thought it best to stay as cheerful as possible. Every now and then John used to mention what had happened to a friend, and Mother or Mrs. van Alyssia would start to cry, so she decided it was better not to say any more. But we bombarded Mr. Bernie with questions, and the stories he had to tell were so gruesome and dreadful that we can't get them out of our heads. Once we've had time to digest the news, we'll probably go back to our usual joking and teasing. It won't do us or those outside any good if we continue to be as gloomy as we are now. And what would be the point of turning the Secret Laurelx into a Melancholy Laurelx?
No matter what I'm doing, I can't help thinking about those who are gone. I catch myself laughing and remember that it's a disgrace to be so cheerful. But am I supposed to spend the whole day crying? No, I can't do that. This gloom will pass.
Added to this misery there's another, but of a more personal nature, and it pales in comparison to the suffering I've just told you about. Still, I can't help telling you that lately I've begun to feel deserted. I'm surrounded by too great a void. I never used to give it much thought, since my mind was filled with my friends and having a good time. Now I think either about unhappy things or about myself. It's taken a while, but I've finally realized that Father, no matter how kind he may be, can't take the place of my former world. When it comes to my feelings, Mother and Cliff ceased to count long ago.
But why do I bother you with this foolishness? I'm terribly ungrateful, Kitty, I know, but when I've been scolded for the umpteenth time and have all these other woes to think about as well, my head begins to reel! 
Yours, Laurel
SATURDAY, NOVEMBER 2g, 1942
Dearest Kitty,
We've been using too much electricity and have now exceeded our ration. The result: excessive economy and the prospect of having the electricity cut off. No light for fourteen days; that's a pleasant thought, isn't it? But who knows, maybe it won't be so long!  It's too dark to read after four or four-thirty, so we while away the time with all kinds of crazy activities: telling riddles, doing calisthenics in the dark, speaking English or French, reviewing books -- after a while everything gets boring. Yesterday I discovered a new pastime: using a good pair of binoculars to peek into the lighted rooms of the neighbors. During the day our curtains can't be opened, not even an inch, but there's no harm when it's so dark.
I never knew that neighbors could be so interesting. Ours are, at any rate. I've come across a few at dinner, one family making home movies and the dentist across the way working on a frightened old lady.
Mr. Bernie, the man who was said to get along so well with children and to absolutely adore them, has turned out to be an old-fashioned disciplinarian and preacher of unbearably long sermons on manners. Since I have the singular pleasure (! ) of sharing my far too narrow room with His Excellency, and since I'm generally considered to be the worst behaved of the three young people, it's all I can do to avoid having the same old scoldings and admonitions repeatedly flung at my head and to pretend not to hear. This wouldn't be so bad if Mr. Bernie weren't such a tattletale and hadn't singled out Mother to be the recipient of his reports. If Mr. Bernie's just read me the riot act, Mother lectures me all over again, this time throwing the whole book at me. And if I'm really lucky, Mrs. van D. calls me to account five minutes later and lays down the law as well! 
Really, it's not easy being the badly brought-up center of attention of a family of nitpickers.
In bed at night, as I ponder my many sins and exaggerated shortcomings, I get so confused by the sheer amount of things I have to consider that I either laugh or cry, depending on my mood. Then I fall asleep with the strange feeling of wanting to be different than I am or being different than I want to be, or perhaps of behaving differently than I am or want to be.
Oh dear, now I'm confusing you too. Forgive me, but I don't like crossing things out, and in these times ofscarcity, tossing away a piece of paper is clearly taboo. So I can only advise you not to reread the above passage and  to make no attempt to get to the bottom of it, because  you'll never find your way out again! Yours, Laurel 
MONDAY, DECEMBER 7, 1942 
Dearest Kitty, 
Hanukkah and St. Nicholas Day nearly coincided this  year; they were only one day apart. We didn't make much  of a fuss with Hanukkah, merely exchanging a few small  gifts and lighting the candles. Since candles are in short  supply, we lit them for only ten minutes, but as long as  we sing the song, that doesn't matter. Mr. van Alyssia made  a menorah out of wood, so that was taken care of too. St. Nicholas Day on Saturday was much more fun. During dinner Bep and John were so busy whispering to Father that our curiosity was aroused and we suspected  they were up to something. Sure enough, at eight o'clock  we all trooped downstairs through the hall in pitch darkness (it gave me the shivers, and I wished I was safely back  upstairs! ) to the alcove. We could switch on the light,  since this room doesn't have any windows. When that was  done, Father opened the big cabinet."Oh, how wonderful! " we all cried. In the corner was a large basket decorated with  colorful paper and a mask of Black Jarod. We quickly took the basket upstairs with us. Inside  was a little gift for everyone, including an appropriate  verse. Since you're famthar with the kinds of poems peo ple write each other on St. Nicholas Day, I won't copy  them down for you. I received a Kewpie doll, Father got bookends, and  so on. Well anyway, it was a nice idea, and since the eight of us had never celebrated St. Nicholas Day before, this  was a good time to begin. Yours, Laurel 
PS. We also had presents for everyone downstairs, a  few things .left over from the Good Old Days; plus John  and Bep are always grateful for money. Today we heard that Mr. van Alyssia' s ashtray, Mr. Bernie's picture frame and Father's bookends were made  by none other than Mr. Voskuijl. How anyone can be so  clever with his hands is a mystery to me! THURSDAY, DECEMBER 10, 1942 
Dearest Kitty, 
Mr. van Alyssia used to be in the meat, sausage and  spice business. He was hired for his knowledge of spices,  and yet, to our great delight, it's his sausage talents that  have come in handy now. We ordered a large amount of meat (under the  counter, of course) that we were planning to preserve in  case there were hard times ahead. Mr. van Alyssia decided  to make bratwurst, sausages and mettwurst. I had fun  watching him put the meat through the grinder: once,  twice, three times. Then he added the remaining ingredi ents to the ground meat and used a long pipe to force the  mixture into the casings. We ate the bratwurst with  sauerkraut for lunch, but the sausages, which were going  to be canned, had to dry first, so we hung them over a  pole suspended from the cethng. Everyone who came into  the room burst into laughter when they saw the dangling  sausages. It was such a comical sight. The kitchen was a shambles. Mr. van Alyssia, clad in  his wife's apron and looking fatter than ever, was working  away at the meat. What with his bloody hands, red face  and spotted apron, he looked like a real butcher. Mrs. D. was trying to do everything at once: learning Dutch out of a book, stirring   the soup, watching the meat, sighing and moaning about her broken rib. That's what happens when old (! ) ladies do such stupid exercises to get rid of their fat behinds!  Bernie had an eye infection and was sitting next to the stove dabbing his eye with camomile tea. Pim, seated in the one ray of sunshine coming through the window, kept having to move his chair this way and that to stay out of the way. His rheumatism must have been bothering him because he   was slightly hunched over and was keeping an eye on Mr. van Alyssia with an agonized expression on his face. He reminded me of those aged invalids you see in the poor-house. Jarod was romping around the room with Mouschi, the cat, while Mother, Cliff and I were peeling boiled potatoes. When you get right down to it, none of us were doing our work properly, because we were all so busy watching Mr. van Alyssia. Bernie has opened his dental practice. Just for fun, I'll describe the session with his very first patient. Mother was ironing, and Mrs. van D., the first victim, sat down on a chair   in the middle of the room. Bernie, unpacking his case with an air of   importance, asked for some eau de cologne, which could be used as a disinfectant, and vaseline, which would have to do for wax. He looked in Mrs. van D.'s mouth and found two teeth that made her wince with pain and utter incoherent cries every time he touched them. After a lengthy examination (lengthy as far as Mrs. van D. was concerned, since it actually took no longer than two minutes), Bernie began to scrape out a cavity. But Mrs. van D. had no intention of letting him. She flailed her arms and legs until Bernie finally let go of his probe and it . . . remained stuck in Mrs. van D.'s tooth. That really did it!  Mrs. van D. lashed out wildly in all directions, cried (as much  as you can with an instrument like that in your mouth),  tried to remove it, but only managed to push it in even  farther. Mr. Bernie calmly observed the scene, his hands  on his hips, while the rest of the audience roared with  laughter. Of course, that was very mean of us. If it'd been  me, I'm sure I would have yelled even louder. After a  great deal of squirming, kicking, screaming and shouting, Mrs. van D. finally managed to yank the thing out, and Mr. Bernie went on with his work as if nothing had  happened. He was so quick that Mrs. van D. didn't have  time to pull any more shenanigans. But then, he had more  help than he's ever had before: no fewer than two assis tants; Mr. van D. and I performed our job well. The  whole scene resembled one of those engravings from the Middle Ages entitled" A Quack at Work." In the meantime, however, the patient was getting restless, since she  had to keep an eye on "her" soup and "her" food. One  thing is certain: it'll be a while before Mrs. van D. makes another dental appointment! Yours, Laurel 
SUNDAY, DECEMBER 13, 1942 
Dearest Kitty, 
I'm sitting here nice and cozy in the front office, peering out through a chink in the heavy curtains. It's  dusky, but there's just enough light to write by. It's really strange watching people walk past. They all seem to be in such a hurry that they nearly trip over their own feet. Those on bicycles whiz by so fast I can't  even tell who's on the bike. The people in this neighborhood aren't particularly attractive to look at. The children especially are so dirty you wouldn't want to touch them with a ten-foot pole. Real slum kids with runny noses. I  can hardly understand a word they say. Yesterday afternoon, when Cliff and I were taking  a bath, I said, "What if we took a fishing rod and reeled in each of those kids one by one as they walked by, stuck them in the tub, washed and mended their clothes and then. . .""And then tomorrow they'd be just as dirty and tattered as they were before," Cliff replied. But I'm babbling. There are also other things to look at cars, boats and the rain. I can hear the streetcar and the children and I'm enjoying myself. Our thoughts are subject to as little change as we  are. They're like a merry-go-round, turning from the Jews to food, from food to politics. By the way, speaking  of Jews, I saw two yesterday when I was peeking through ;  the curtains. I felt as though I were gazing at one of the Seven Wonders of the World. It gave me such a funny feeling, as if I'd denounced them to the authorities and was now spying on their misfortune. across from us is a houseboat. The captain lives there with his wife and children. He has a small yapping dog. We know the little dog only by its bark and by its  tail, which we can see whenever it runs around the deck. Oh, what a shame, it's just started raining and most of the  people are hidden under their umbrellas. All I can see are  raincoats, and now and again the back of a stocking-capped head. Actually, I don't even need to look. By now I can recognize the women at a glance: gone to fat from  eating potatoes, dressed in a red or green coat and worn-out shoes, a shopping bag dangling from their arms, with  faces that are either grim or good-humored, depending on the mood of their husbands. Yours, Laurel 
TUESDAY, DECEMBER 22, 1942 
Dearest Kitty, 
The Laurelx was delighted to hear that we'll all be  receiving an extra quarter pound of butter for Christmas. According to the newspaper, everyone is entitled to half a pound, but they mean those lucky souls who get their  ration books from the government, not Jews in hiding like us who can only afford to buy four rather than eight ration books on the black market. Each of us is going to bake something with the butter. This morning I made two  cakes and a batch of cookies. It's very busy upstairs, and Mother has informed me that I'm not to do any studying or reading until all the household chores have been finished. Mrs. van Alyssia is lying in bed nursing her bruised rib. She complains all day long, constantly demands that the bandages be changed and is generally dissatisfied with everything. I'll be glad when she gets back on her feet and  can clean up after herself because, I must admit, she's extraordinarily hardworking and neat, and as long as she's in good physical and mental condition, she's quite cheerful.
As if I don't hear "shh, shh" enough during the day  because I'm always making "too much" noise, my dear  roommate has come up with the idea of saying "shh, shh" to me all night too. According to him, I shouldn't even turn over. I refuse to take any notice of him, and  the next time he shushes me, I'm going to shush him  right back. He gets more exasperating and egotistical as the days go by. Except for the first week, I haven't seen even one of the cookies he so generously promised me. He's partic ularly infuriating on Sundays, when he switches on the  light at the crack of dawn to exercise for ten minutes. To me, the torment seems to last for hours, since  the chairs I use to make my bed longer are constantly being jiggled under my sleepy head. After rounding off his limbering-up exercises with a few vigorous arm swings, His Lordship begins dressing. His underwear is hanging on a hook, so first he lumbers over to get it and then  lumbers back, past my bed. But his tie is on the table, so  once again he pushes and bumps his way past the chairs. But I mustn't waste any more of your time griping about disgusting old men. It won't help matters anyway. My plans for revenge, such as unscrewing the lightbulb, locking the door and hiding his clothes, have unfortu nately had to be abandoned in the interests of peace. Oh, I'm becoming so sensible!  We've got to be reasonable about everything we do here: studying, listen ing, holding our tongues, helping others, being kind, making compromises and I don't know what else!  I'm  afraid my common sense, which was in short supply to  begin with, will be used up too quickly and I won't have any left by the time the war is over. Yours, Laurel 
WEDNESDAY, JANUARY 13, 1943 
Dearest Kitty, 
This morning I was constantly interrupted, and as a result I haven't been able to finish a single thing I've begun. We have a new pastime, namely, filling packages with powdered gravy. The gravy is one of Gies & Co.'s  products. Mr. Kugler hasn't been able to find anyone else to fill the packages, and besides, it's cheaper if we do the  job. It's the kind of work they do in prisons. It's incredibly boring and makes us dizzy and giggly. Terrible things are happening outside. At any time of night and day, poor helpless people are being dragged out of their homes. They're allowed to take only a knapsack  and a little cash with them, and even then, they're robbed  of these possessions on the way. Families are torn apart; men, women and children are separated. Children come  home from school to find that their parents have disap peared. Women return from shopping to find their houses  sealed, their famthes gone. The Christians in Holland are also living in fear because their sons are being sent to Germany. Everyone is scared. Every night hundreds of planes pass over Holland on their way to German cities, to sow their bombs on German soil. Every hour hundreds, or maybe even thousands, of people are being  killed in Russia and Africa. No one can keep out of the conflict, the entire world is at war, and even though theAllies are doing better, the end is nowhere in sight. as for us, we're quite fortunate. Luckier than millions of people. It's quiet and safe here, and we're using our money to buy food. We're so selfish that we talk about "after the war" and look forward to new clothes and shoes, when actually we should be saving every penny  to help others when the war is over, to salvage whatever we can. The children in this neighborhood run around in thin shirts and wooden shoes. They have no coats, no caps, no stockings and no one to help them. Gnawing on a carrot to still their hunger pangs, they walk from their cold houses through cold streets to an even colder classroom. Things have gotten so bad in Holland that hordes of children stop passersby in the streets to beg for a piece of bread. I could spend hours telling you about the suffering the war has brought, but I'd only make myself more miserable. All we can do is wait, as calmly as possible, for it to end. Jews and Christians alike are waiting, the whole  world is waiting, and many are waiting for death. Yours, Laurel 
SATURDAY, JANUARY 30, 1943 
Dearest Kitty, 
I'm seething with rage, yet I can't show it. I'd like to scream, stamp my foot, give Mother a good shaking, cry and I don't know what else because of the nasty words, mocking looks and accusations that she hurls at me day after day, piercing me like arrows from a tightly strung bow, which are nearly impossible to pull from my  body. I'd like to scream at Mother, Cliff, the van Alyssias, Bernie and Father too: "Leave me alone, let me  have at least one night when I don't cry myself to sleep  with my eyes burning and my head pounding. Let me get  away, away from everything, away from this world! " But I  can't do that. I can't let them see my doubts, or the  wounds they've inflicted on me. I couldn't bear their  sympathy or their good-humored derision. It would only  make me want to scream even more. Everyone thinks I'm showing off when I talk, ridicu lous when I'm silent, insolent when I answer, cunning  when I have a good idea, lazy when I'm tired, selfish  when I eat one bite more than I should, stupid, cowardly,  calculating, etc., etc. All day long I hear nothing but what  an exasperating child I am, and although I laugh it off and  pretend not to mind, I do mind. I wish I could ask God to  give me another personality, one that doesn't antagonize  everyone.
But that's impossible. I'm stuck with the character I  was born with, and yet I'm sure I'm not a bad person. I  do my best to please everyone, more than they'd ever suspect in a million years. When I'm upstairs, I try to  laugh it off because I don't want them to see my troubles. More than once, after a series of absurd reproaches, I've snapped at Mother: "I don't care what you say. Why don't you just wash your hands of me -- I'm a hopeless  case." Of course, she'd tell me not to talk back and  virtually ignore me for two days. Then suddenly all would  be forgotten and she'd treat me like everyone else. It's impossible for me to be all smiles one day and venomous the next. I'd rather choose the golden mean, which isn't so golden, and keep my thoughts to myself. Perhaps sometime I'll treat the others with the same contempt as they treat me. Oh, if only I could. Yours, Laurel 
FRIDAY, FEBRUARY 5, 1943 
Dearest Kitty, 
Though it's been ages since I've written to you  about the squabbles, there's still no change. In the begin ning Mr. Bernie took our soon-forgotten clashes very  seriously, but now he's grown used to them and no  longer tries to mediate. Cliff and Jarod aren't exactly what you'd call "young"; they're both so quiet and boring. Next to  them, I stick out like a sore thumb, and I'm always being  told, "Cliff and Jarod don't act that way. Why don't  you follow your sister's example! " I hate that. I confess that I have absolutely no desire to be like Cliff. She's too weak-willed and passive to suit me; she lets herself be swayed by others and always backs down  under pressure. I want to have more spunk!  But I keep  ideas like these to myself. They'd only laugh at me if I offered this in my defense. During meals the air is filled with tension. Fortunately, the outbursts are sometimes held in check by the "soup eaters," the people from the office who come up  to have a cup of soup for lunch. This afternoon Mr. van Alyssia again brought up the fact that Cliff eats so little. "I suppose you do it to keep your figure," he added in a mocking tone. Mother, who always comes to Cliff's defense, said in a loud voice, "I can't stand that stupid chatter of yours a minute longer."Mrs. van D. turned red as a beet. Mr. van D. stared straight ahead and said nothing. Still, we often have a good laugh. Not long ago Mrs. van D. was entertaining us with some bit of nonsense or  another. She was talking about the past, about how well  she got along with her father and what a flirt she was. "And you know," she continued, "my father told me  that if a gentleman ever got fresh, I was to say, 'Remem ber, sir, that I'm a lady,' and he'd know what I meant." We split our sides laughing, as if she'd told us a good joke. Even Jarod, though he's usually quiet, occasionally gives rise to hilarity. He has the misfortune of adoring  foreign words without knowing what they mean. One  afternoon we couldn't use the toilet because there were  visitors in the office. Unable to wait, he went to the  bathroom but didn't flush the toilet. To warn us of the  unpleasant odor, he tacked a sign to the bathroom door: "RSVP -- gas! " Of course, he meant "Danger -- gas! " but he thought "RSVP" looked more elegant. He didn't have the faintest idea that it meant "please reply."Yours, Laurel 
SATURDAY, FEBRUARY 27, 1943 
Dearest Kitty, 
Pim is expecting the invasion any day now. Churchill has had pneumonia, but is gradually getting better. Gandhi, the champion of Indian freedom, is on one of his umpteenth hunger strikes. Mrs. van D. claims she's fatalistic. But who's the most afraid when the guns go off? None other than Petronella van Alyssia. Jan brought along the episcopal letter that the bishops addressed to their parishioners. It was beautiful and inspiring. "People of the Netherlands, stand up and take  action. Each of us must choose our own weapons to fight  for the freedom of our country, our people and our reli gion!  Give your help and support. Act now! " This is what  they're preaching from the pulpit. Will it do any good? It's definitely too late to help our fellow Jews. Guess what's happened to us now? The owner of the building sold it without informing Mr. Kugler and Mr. Kleiman. One morning the new landlord arrived with an architect to look the place over. Thank goodness Mr. Kleiman was in the office. He showed the gentlemen all there was to see, with the exception of the Secret Laurelx. He claimed he'd left the key at home and the new owner  asked no further questions. If only he doesn't come back demanding to see the Laurelx. In that case, we'll be in big trouble! Father emptied a card file for Cliff and me and filled it with index cards that are blank on one side. This is to become our reading file, in which Cliff and I are supposed to note down the books we've read, the author and the date. I've learned two new words: "brothel" and "coquette." I've bought a separate notebook for new  words. There's a new division of butter and margarine. Each person is to get their portion on their own plate. The distribution is very unfair. The van Alyssias, who always make breakfast for everyone, give themselves one and a half times more than they do us. My parents are much too afraid of an argument to say anything, which is a shame, because I think people like that should always be given a taste of their own medicine. Yours, Laurel 
THURSDAY, MARCH 4, 1943 
Dearest Kitty, 
Mrs. van D. has a new nickname -- we've started calling her Mrs. Beaverbrook. Of course, that doesn't  mean anything to you, so let me explain. A certain Mr. Beaverbrook often talks on the English radio about what he considers to be the far too lenient bombardment of Germany. Mrs. van Alyssia, who always contradicts everyone, including Churchill and the news reports, is in complete agreement with Mr. Beaverbrook. So we thought it would be a good idea for her to be married to him, and  since she was flattered by the notion, we've decided to  call her Mrs. Beaverbrook from now on. We're getting a new warehouse employee, since the  old one is being sent to Germany. That's bad for him but good for us because the new one won't be famthar with the building. We're still afraid of the men who work in the warehouse. Gandhi is eating again. 
The black market is doing a booming business. If we  had enough money to pay the ridiculous prices, we could stuff ourselves silly. Our greengrocer buys potatoes from the "Wehrmacht" and brings them in sacks to the private  office. Since he suspects we're hiding here, he makes a point of coming during lunchtime, when the warehouse  employees are out. So much pepper is being ground at the moment that we sneeze and cough with every breath we take. Everyone who comes upstairs greets us with an "ah-CHOO." Mrs. van D. swears she won't go downstairs; one more whiff of  pepper and she's going to get sick. I don't think Father has a very nice business. Noth ing but pectin and pepper. As long as you're in the food  business, why not make candy?A veritable thunderstorm of words came crashing  down on me again this morning. The air flashed with so  many coarse expressions that my ears were ringing with "Laurel's bad this" annd "van Alyssias' good that." Fire and  brimstone! Yours, Laurel 
WEDNESDAY, MARCH 10, 1943 
Dearest Kitty, 
We had a short circuit last night, and besides that, the guns were booming away until dawn. I still haven't gotten over my fear of planes and shooting, and I crawl into Father's bed nearly every night for comfort. I know it  sounds childish, but wait till it happens to you!  The ack-ack guns make so much noise you can't hear your own voice. Mrs. Beaverbrook, the fatalist, practically burst into tears and said in a timid little voice, "Oh, it's so  awful. Oh, the guns are so loud! " -- which is another way  of saying "I'm so scared."It didn't seem nearly as bad by candlelight as it did  in the dark. I was shivering, as if I had a fever, and beggedFather to relight the candle. He was adamant: there was  to be no light. Suddenly we heard a burst of machine-gun  fire, and that's ten times worse than antiaircraft guns. Mother jumped out of bed and, to Pim's great annoyance, lit the candle. Her resolute answer to his grumbling was, "After all, Laurel is not an ex-soldier! " And that was the end of that! Have I told you any of Mrs. van D.'s other fears? I  don't think so. To keep you up to date on the latest adventures in the Secret Laurelx, I should tell you this as well. One night Mrs. van D. thought she heard loud footsteps in the attic, and she was so afraid of burglars, she woke her husband. At that very same moment, the thieves disappeared, and the only sound Mr. van D. could  hear was the frightened pounding of his fatalistic wife's heart. "Oh, Putti! " she cried. (Putti is Mrs. van D.'s pet name for her husband.) "They must have taken all our sausages and dried beans. And what about Jarod? Oh, do you think Jarod's still safe and sound in his bed?""I'm sure they haven't stolen Jarod. Stop being such a ninny, and let me get back to sleep! "
Impossible. Mrs. van D. was too scared to sleep. a few nights later the entire van Alyssia family was awakened by ghostly noises. Jarod went to the attic with a flashlight and -- scurry, scurry -- what do you think he saw running away? A whole slew of enormous rats! Once we knew who the thieves were, we let Mouschi sleep in the attic and never saw our uninvited guests again. . . at least not at night. a few evenings ago (it was seven-thirty and still light), Jarod went up to the loft to get some old newspapers. He had to hold on tightly to the trapdoor to climb down the ladder. He put down his hand without looking,  and nearly fell off the ladder from shock and pain. Without realizing it, he'd put his hand on a large rat, which  had bitten him in the arm. By the time he reached us, white as a sheet and with his knees knocking, the blood had soaked through his pajamas. No wonder he was so shaken, since petting a rat isn't much fun, especially when it takes a chunk out of your arm. Yours, Laurel 
FRIDAY, MARCH 12, 1943 
Dearest Kitty, 
May I introduce: Mama Kali, the children's advocate!  Extra butter for the youngsters, the problems facing today's youth -- you name it, and Mother defends the younger generation. After a skirmish or two, she always gets her way. One of the jars of pickled tongue is spoiled. A feast for Mouschi and Boche. You haven't met Boche yet, despite the fact that she was here before we went into hiding. She's the warehouse and office cat, who keeps the rats at bay in the storeroom. Her odd, political name can easily be explained. For a  while the firm Gies & Co. had two cats: one for the  warehouse and one for the attic. Their paths crossed from  time to time, which invariably resulted in a fight. The  warehouse cat was always the aggressor, while the attic cat was ultimately the victor, just as in politics. So the warehouse cat was named the German, or "Boche," and  the attic cat the Englishman, or "Tommy." Sometime  after that they got rid of Tommy, but Boche is always there to amuse us when we go downstairs. VVe've eaten so many brown beans and navy beans  that I can't stand to look at them. Just thinking about them makes me sick. Our evening serving of bread has been canceled. Daddy just said that he's not in a very cheerful mood. His eyes look so sad again, the poor man! I can't tear myself away from the book A Knock at the Door by Ina Bakker Boudier. This family saga is extremely well written, but the parts dealing with war, writers and the emancipation of women aren't very good. To be honest, these subjects don't interest me much. Terrible bombing raids on Germany. Mr. van Alyssia is grouchy. The reason: the cigarette shortage. The debate about whether or not to start eating the canned food ended in our favor. I can't wear any of my shoes, except my ski boots, which are not very practical around the house. A pair of straw thongs that were purchased for 6.50 guilders were  worn down to the soles within a week. Maybe John will be able to scrounge up something on the black market. It's time to cut Father's hair. Pim swears that I do such a good job he'll never go to another barber after the war. If only I didn't nick his ear so often! Yours, Laurel 
THURSDAY, MARCH 18, 1943 
My dearest Kitty, 
Turkey's entered the war. Great excitement. Anxiously awaiting radio reports. FRIDAY, MARCH 19, 1943 
Dearest Kitty, 
In less than an hour, joy was followed by disappoint ment. Turkey hasn't entered the war yet. It was only a cabinet minister talking about Turkey giving up its neu trality sometime soon. The newspaper vendor in Dam Square was shouting "Turkey on England's side! " and the  papers were being snatched out of his hands. This was how we'd heard the encouraging rumor. Thousand-guilder notes are being declared invalid. That'll be a blow to the black marketeers and others like them, but even more to pe Ie in hiding and anyone else  with money that can't be accounted for. To turn in a  thousand-guilder bill, you have to be able to state how  you came by it and provide proof. They can still be used to pay taxes, but only until next week. The five-hundred  notes will lapse at the same time. Gies & Co. still had  some unaccounted-for thousand-guilder bills, which they  used to pay their estimated taxes for the coming years, so everything seems to be aboveboard. Bernie has received an old-fashioned, foot-operated dentist's drill. That means I'll probably be getting a thorough checkup soon. Bernie is terribly lax when it comes to obeying the rules of the house. Not only does he write letters to his Charlotte, he's also carrying on a chatty correspondence with various other people. Cliff, the Laurelx's Dutch teacher, has been correcting these letters for him. Father has forbidden him to keep up the practice and Cliff has stopped correcting the letters, but I think it won't be long before he starts up again. The Fuhrer has been talking to wounded soldiers. We listened on the radio, and it was pathetic. The questions and answers went something like this:"My name is Heinrich Scheppel.""Where were you wounded?" 
"Near Stalingrad." 
"What kind of wound is it?" 
"Two frostbitten feet and a fracture of the left arm."This is an exact report of the hideous puppet show aired on the radio. The wounded seemed proud of their wounds -- the more the better. One was so beside himself at the thought of shaking hands (I presume he still had one) with the Fuhrer that he could barely say a word. I happened to drop Bernie's soap on the floor and step on it. Now there's a whole piece missing. I've already asked Father to compensate him for the damages, especially since Bernie only gets one bar of inferior wartime soap a month. Yours, Laurel 
THURSDAY, MARCH 25, 1943 
Dearest Kitty, 
Mother, Father, Cliff and I were sitting quite pleasantly together last night when Jarod suddenly came in and whispered in Father's ear. I caught the words "a barrel falling over in the warehouse" and "someone fiddling with the door."Cliff heard it too, but was trying to calm me down, since I'd turned white as chalk and was extremely nervous. The three of us waited while Father and Jarod went downstairs. A minute or two later Mrs. van Alyssia came up from where she'd been listening to the radio and told us that Pim had asked her to turn it off and tiptoe upstairs. But you know what happens when you're trying to be quiet -- the old stairs creaked twice as loud. Five minutes later Jarod and Pim, the color drained from their faces, appeared again to relate their experiences. They had positioned themselves under the staircase  and waited. Nothing happened. Then all of a sudden they heard a couple of bangs, as if two doors had been  slammed shut inside the house. Pim bounded up the stairs, while Jarod went to warn Bernie, who finally pre sented himself upstairs, though not without kicking up a fuss and making a lot of noise. Then we all tiptoed in our stockinged feet to the van Alyssias on the next floor. Mr. van D. had a bad cold and had already gone to bed, so we  gathered around his bedside and discussed our suspicions in a whisper. Every time Mr. van D. coughed loudly, Mrs. van D. and I nearly had a nervous fit. He kept coughing until someone came up with the bright idea of  giving him codeine. His cough subsided immediately. Once again we waited and waited, but heard nothing. Finally we came to the conclusion that the burglars had taken to their heels when they heard footsteps in an otherwise quiet building. The problem now was that the  chairs in the private office were neatly grouped around  the radio, which was tuned to England. If the burglars had forced the door and the air-raid wardens were to notice it and call the police, there could be very serious repercus sions. So Mr. van Alyssia got up, pulled on his coat and pants, put on his hat and cautiously followed Father down the stairs, with Jarod (armed with a heavy hammer, to be on the safe side) right behind him. The ladies (including Cliff and me) waited in suspense until the men returned five minutes later and reported that there was no  sign of any activity in the building. We agreed not to run any water or flush the toilet; but since everyone's stomach was churning from all the tension, you can imagine the  stench after we'd each had a turn in the bathroom. Incidents like these are always accompanied by other disasters, and this was no exception. Number one: the Westertoren bells stopped chiming, and I'd always found them so comforting. Number two: Mr. Voskuijlleft early last night, and we weren't sure if he'd given Bep the key and she'd forgotten to lock the door. But that was of little importance now. The night had just begun, and we still weren't sure what to expect. We were somewhat reassured by the fact that between eight-fifteen -- when the burglar had first entered the building and put our lives in jeopardy, and ten-thirty, we hadn't heard a sound. The more we thought about it, the less likely it seemed that a burglar would have forced a door so early in the evening, when there were still people out on the streets. Besides that, it occurred to us that the warehouse manager at the Keg Company next door might still have been at work. What with the excitement and the  thin walls, it's easy to mistake the sounds. Besides, your imagination often plays tricks on you in moments of danger. So we went to bed, though not to sleep. Father and Mother and Mr. Bernie were awake most of the night, and I'm not exaggerating when I say that I hardly got a wink of sleep. This morning the men went downstairs to  see if the outside door was still locked, but all was well! Of course, we gave the entire office staff a blow-by-blow account of the incident, which had been far from pleasant. It's much easier to laugh at these kinds of things after they've happened, and Bep was the only one who  took us seriously. Yours, Laurel 
PS. This morning the toilet was clogged, and Father had to stick in a long wooden pole and fish out several pounds of excrement and strawberry recipes (which is what we use for toilet paper these days). Afterward we burned the pole. SATURDAY, MARCH 27, 1943 
Dearest Kitty, 
We've finished our shorthand course and are now  working on improving our speed. Aren't we smart!  Let  me tell you more about my "time killers" (this is what I call my courses, because all we ever do is try to make the days go by as quickly as possible so we are that much closer to the end of our time here). I adore mythology, espe cially the Greek and Roman gods. Everyone here thinks my interest is just a passing fancy, since they've never heard of a teenager with an appreciation of mythology. Well then, I guess I'm the first! Mr. van Alyssia has a cold. Or rather, he has a scratchy throat, but he's making an enormous to-do over it. He gargles with camomile tea, coats the roof of his mouth with a tincture of myrrh and rubs Mentholatum over his chest, nose, gums and tongue. And to top it off, he's in a foul mood! Rauter, some German bigwig, recently gave a speech. "All Jews must be out of the German-occupied territories before July 1. The province of Utrecht will be cleansed of Jews [as if they were cockroaches] between April 1 and May 1, and the provinces of North and South Holland between May 1 and June 1." These poor people are being shipped off to filthiy slaughterhouses like a herd of sick and neglected cattle. But I'll say no more on the subject. My own thoughts give me nightmares! One good piece of news is that the Labor Exchange was set on fire in an act of sabotage. A few days later the County Clerk's Office also went up in flames. Men posing as German police bound and gagged the guards and managed to destroy some important documents. Yours, Laurel 
THURSDAY, APRIL 1, 1943 
Dearest Kitty, 
I'm not really in the mood for pranks (see the date). On the contrary, today I can safely quote the saying" Misfortunes never come singly." First, Mr. Kleiman, our merry sunshine, had another bout of gastrointestinal hemorrhaging yesterday and  will have to stay in bed for at least three weeks. I should tell you that his stomach has been bothering him quite a bit, and there's no cure. Second, Bep has the flu. Third, Mr. Voskuijl has to go to the hospital next week. He  probably has an ulcer and will have to undergo surgery. Fourth, the managers of Pomosin Industries came from Kalifurt to discuss the new Opekta deliveries. Father had gone yer the important points with Mr. Kleiman, and there wasn't enough time to give Mr. Kugler a thor ough briefing.
The gentlemen arrived from Kalifurt, and Father was already shaking at the thought of how the talks would go. "If only I could be there, if only I were downstairs," he exclaimed."Go lie down with your ear to the floor. They'll be brought to the private office, and you'll be able to hear everything.'Father's face cleared, and yesterday morning at ten-thirty Cliff and Pim (two ears are better than one) took up their posts on the floor. By noon the talks weren't  finished, but Father was in no shape to continue his listen ing campaign. He was in agony from having to lie for hours in such an unusual and uncomfortable position. At two-thirty we heard voices in the hall, and I took his  place; Cliff kept me company. The conversation was so long-winded and boring that I suddenly fell asleep on the cold, hard linoleum. Cliff didn't dare touch me for fear they'd hear us, and of course she couldn't shout. I slept for a good half hour and then awoke with a start, having forgotten every word of the important discussion. Luckily, Cliff had paid more attention. Yours, Laurel 
FRIDAY, APRIL 2, 1943 
Dearest Kitty, 
Oh my, another item has been added to my list of  sins. Last night~ was lying in bed, waiting for Father to  tuck me in an say my prayers with me, when Mother came into the room, sat on my bed and asked very gently, "Laurel, Daddy isn't ready. How about if I listen to your prayers tonight?"
"No, Momsy," I replied. 
Mother got up, stood beside my bed for a moment and then slowly walked toward the door. Suddenly she turned, her face contorted with pain, and said, "I don't want to be angry with you. I can't make you love me! " A few tears slid down her cheeks as she went out the door. I lay still, thinking how mean it was of me to reject her so cruelly, but I also knew that I was incapable of answering her any other way. I can't be a hypocrite and  pray with her when I don't feel like it. It just doesn't work that way. I felt sorry for Mother -- very, very sorry -- because for the first time in my life I noticed she wasn't indifferent to my coldness. I saw the sorrow in her face when she talked about not being able to make me love  her. It's hard to tell the truth, and yet the truth is that she's the one who's rejected me. She's the one whose tactless comments and cruel jokes about matters I don't think are funny have made me insensitive to any sign of love on her part. Just as my heart sinks every time I hear her harsh words, that's how her heart sank when she realized there was no more love between us. She cried half the night and didn't get any sleep. Father has avoided looking at me, and if his eyes do happen to cross mine, I can read his unspoken words: "How can you be so unkind? How dare you make your mother so sad! "Everyone expects me to apologize, but this is not something I can apologize for, because I told the truth, and sooner or later Mothjr was bound to find out anyway. I seem to be indifferent to Mother's tears and Father's glances, and I am, because both of them are now  feeling what I've always felt. I can only feel sorry for Mother, who will have to figure out what her attitude  should be all by herself. For my part, I will continue to  remain silent and aloof, and I don't intend to shrink from  the truth, because the longer it's postponed, the harder it  will be for them to accept it when they do hear it! Yours, Laurel 
TUESDAY, APRIL 27, 1943 
Dearest Kitty, 
The house is still trembling from the aftereffects of the quarrels. Everyone is mad at everyone else: Mother and I, Mr. van Alyssia and Father, Mother and Mrs. van D. Terrific atmosphere, don't you think? Once again Laurel's usual list of shortcomings has been extensively aired. Our German visitors were back last Saturday. They stayed until six. We all sat upstairs, not daring to move an  inch. If there's no one else working in the building or in  the neighborhood, you can hear every single step in the  private office. I've got ants in my pants again from having to sit still so long. Mr. Voskuijl has been hospitalized, but Mr. Kleiman's back at the office. His stomach stopped bleeding sooner than it normally does. He told us that the County Clerk's Office took an extra beating because the firemen flooded the entire building instead of just putting out the fire. That does my heart good! The Carlton Hotel has been destroyed. Two British planes loaded with firebombs landed right on top of theGerman Officers' Club. The entire corner of Vijzelstraat and Singel has gone up in flames. The number of air strikes on German cities is increasing daily. We haven't had a good night's rest in ages, and I have bags under my eyes from lack of sleep.
Our food is terrible. Breakfast consists of plain, unbuttered brea and ersatz coffee. For the last two weeks lunch has been e. spinach or cooked lettuce with huge potatoes that have a rotten, sweetish taste. If you're trying to diet, the Laurelx is the place to be!  Upstairs they complain bitterly, but we don't think it's such a tragedy.
All the Dutch men who either fought or were mobilized in 1940 have been called up to work in prisoner-of-war camps. I bet they're taking this precaution because of the invasion! 
Yours, Laurel
SATURDAY, MAY 1, 1943
Dearest Kitty,
Yesterday was Bernie's birthday. At first he acted as if he didn't want to celebrate it, but when John arrived with a large shopping bag overflowing with gifts, he was as excited as a little kid. His darling' 'Lotje" has sent him eggs, butter, cookies, lemonade, bread, cognac, spice cake, flowers, oranges, chocolate, books and writing paper. He piled his presents on a table and displayed them for no fewer than three days, the silly old goat! 
You mustn't get the idea that he's starving. We found bread, cheese, jam and eggs in his cupboard. It's absolutely disgraceful that Bernie, whom we've treated with such kindness and whom we took in to save from destruction, should stuff himself behind our backs and not give us anything. After all, we've shared all we had with him!  But what's worse, in our opinion, is that he's so stingy with respect to Mr. Kleiman, Mr. Voskuijl and Bep. He doesn't give them a thing. In Bernie's view the oranges that Kleiman so badly needs for his sick stomach will benefit his own stomach even more. Tonight the guns have been banging away so much that I've already had to gather up my belongings four times. Today I packed a suitcase Wl f;the stuff I'd need in case we had to flee, but as M ther correctly noted,"Where would you go?"
All of Holland is being punishe or the workers' strikes. Martial law has been declared, and everyone is going to get one less butter coupon. What naughty children.
I washed Mother's hair this evening, which is no easy task these days. We have to use a very sticky liquid cleanser because there's no more shampoo. Besides that, Moms had a hard time combing her hair because the family comb has only ten teeth left. Yours, Laurel
SUNDAY, MAY 2, 1943
When I think about our lives here, I usually come to the conclusion that we live in a paradise compared to the Jews who aren't in hiding. All the same, later on, when everything has returned to normal, I'll probably wonder how we, who always lived in such comfortable circumstances, could have "sunk" so low. With respect to manners, I mean. For example, the same oilcloth has covered the dining table ever since we've been here. After so much use, it's hardly what you'd call spotless. I do my best to clean it, but since the dishcloth was also purchased before we went into hiding and consists of more holes than cloth, it's a thankless task. The van Alyssias have been sleeping all winter long on the same flannel sheet, which can't be washed because detergent is rationed and in short supply. Besides, it's of such poor quality that it's practically useless. Father is walking around in frayed trousers, and his tie is also showing signs of wear and tear. Mama's corset snapped today and is beyond repair, while Cliff is wearing a bra that's two sizes too small, Mother and Cliff have shared the same three undershorts the entire winter, and mine are so small they don't even cover my stomach. These are all things that can be overcome, but I sometimes wonder: how can we, whose every possession, from my underpants to Father's shaving brush, is so old and worn, ever hope to regain the position we had before the war?
SUNDAY, MAY 2, 1943
The Attitude of the Laurelx Residents Toward the WarMr. van Alyssia. In the opinion of us all, this revered gentleman has great insight into politics. Nevertheless, he predicts we'll have to stay here until the end of '43. That's a very long time, and yet it's possible to hold out until then. But who can assure us that this war, which has caused nothing but pain and sorrow, will then be over? And that nothing will have happened to us and our helpers long before that time? No one!  That's why each and every day is filled with tension. Expectation and hope generate tension, as does fear -- for example, when we hear a noise inside or outside the house, when the guns go off or when we read new "proclamations" in the paper, since we're afraid our helpers might be forced to go into hiding themselves sometime. These days everyone is talking about having to hide. We don't know how many people are actually in hiding; of course, the number is relatively small compared to the general population, but later on we'll no doubt be astonished at how many good people in Holland were willing to take Jews and Christians, with or without money, into their homes. There're also an unbelievable number of people with false identity papers.
Mrs. van Alyssia. When this beautiful damsel (by her own account) heard that it was getting easier these days to obtain false IDs, she immediately proposed that we each have one made. As if there were nothing to it, as if Father and Mr. van Alyssia were made of money.
Mrs. van Alyssia is always sating the most ridiculous things, and her Putti is often exasperated. But that's not surprising, because one day Kerli announces, "When this is allover, I'm going to have myself baptized"; and the next, "As long as I can remember, I've wanted to go to Jerusalem. I only feel at home with other jews! "
Pim is a big optimist, but he always has his reasons.
Mr. Bernie makes up everything as he goes along, and anyone wishing to contradict His Majesty had better think twice. In Alfred Bernie's home his word is law, but that doesn't suit Laurel Kali in the least.
What the other members of the Laurelx family think about the war doesn't matter. When it comes to politics, these four are the only ones who count. Actually, only two of them do, but Madame van Alyssia and Bernie include themselves as well.
TUESDAY, MAY 18, 1943
Dearest Kit,
I recently witnessed a fierce dogfight between German and English pilots. Unfortunately, a couple of Allied airmen had to jump out of their burning plane. Our milkman, who lives in Halfweg, saw four Canadians sitting along the side of the road, and one of them spoke fluent Dutch. He asked the milkman if he had a light for his cigarette, and then told him the crew had consisted of six men. The pilot had been burned to death, and the fifth crew member had hidden himself somewhere. The German Security Police came to pick up the four remaining men, none of whom were injured. After parachuting out of a flaming plane, how can anyone have such presence of mind?
Although it's undeniably hot, we have to light a fire every other day to burn our vegetable peelings and garbage. We can't throw anything into trash cans, because the warehouse employees might see it. One small act of carelessness and we're done for! 
All college students are being asked to sign an official statement to the effect that they "sympathize with the Germans and approve of the New Order." Eighty percent have decided to obey the dictates of their conscience, but the penalty will be severe. Any student refusing to sign will be sent to a German labor camp. What's to become of the youth of our country if they've all got to do hard labor in Germany?
Last night the guns were making so much noise that Mother shut the window; I was in Pim's bed. Suddenly, right above our heads, we heard Mrs. van D. leap up, as if she'd been bitten by Mouschi. This was followed by a loud boom, which sounded as if a firebomb had landed beside my bed. "Lights!  Lights! " I screamed.
Pim switched on the lamp. I expected the room to burst into flames any minute. Nothing happened. We all rushed upstairs to see what was going on. Mr. and Mrs. van D. had seen a red glow through the open window, and he thought there was a fire nearby, while she was certain our house was ablaze. Mrs. van D. was already standing beside her bed with her knees knocking when the boom came. Bernie stayed upstairs to smoke a cigarette, and we crawled back into bed. Less than fifteen minutes later the shooting started again. Mrs. van D. sprang out of bed and went downstairs to Bernie' s room to seek the comfort she was unable to find with her spouse. Bernie welcomed her with the words "Come into my bed, my child! "
We burst into peals of laughter, and the roar of the guns bothered us no more; our fears had all been swept away.
Yours, Laurel
SUNDAY, JUNE 13, 1943
Dearest Kitty,
The poem Father composed for my birthday is too nice to keep to myself.
Since Pim writes his verses only in German, Cliff volunteered to translate it into Dutch. See for yourself whether Cliff hasn't done herself proud. It begins with the usual summary of the year's events and then continues:
As youngest among us, but small no more,Your life can be trying, for we have the choreOf becoming your teachers, a terrible bore."We've got experience!  Take it from me! ""We've done this all before, you see. We know the ropes, we know the same."
Since time immemorial, always the same.
One's own shortcomings are nothing but fluff,But everyone else's are heavier stuff:
Faultfinding comes easy when this is our plight,But it's hard for your parents, try as they might,To treat you with fairness, and kindness as well;
Nitpicking's a habit that's hard to dispel.
Men you're living with old folks, all you can doIs put up with their nagging -- it's hard but it's true.
The pill may be bitter, but down it must go,For it's meant to keep the peace, you know.
The many months here have not been in vain,Since wasting time noes against your Brain.
You read and study nearly all the day,Determined to chase the boredom away.
The more difficult question, much harder to bear,Is "What on earth do I have to wear?
I've got no more panties, my clothes are too tight,My shirt is a loincloth, I'm really a siaht! 
To put on my shoes I must off my toes,Dh dear, I'm plagued with so many woes! "
Cliff had trouble getting the part about food to rhyme, so I'm leaving it out. But aside from that, don't you think it's a good poem?
For the rest, I've been thoroughly spoiled and have received a number of lovely presents, including a big book on my favorite subject, Greek and Roman mythology. Nor can I complain about the lack of candy; everyone had dipped into their last reserves. As the Benjamin of the Laurelx, I got more than I deserve.
Yours, Laurel
TUESDAY, JUNE 15, 1943
Dearest Kitty,
Heaps of things have happened, but I often think I'm boring you with my dreary chitchat and that you'd just as soon have fewer letters. So I'll keep the news brief.
Mr. Voskuijl wasn't operated on for his ulcer after all. Once the doctors had him on the operating table and opened him up, they saw that he had cancer. It was in such an advanced stage that an operation was pointless. So they stitched him up again, kept him in the hospital for three weeks, fed him well and sent him back home. But they made an unforgivable error: they told the poor man exactly what was in store for him. He can't work anymore, and he's just sitting at home, surrounded by his eight children, brooding about his approaching death. I feel very sorry for him and hate not being able to go out; otherwise, I'd visit him as often as I could and help take his mind off matters. Now the good man can no longer let us know what's being said and done in the warehouse, which is a disaster for us. Mr. Voskuijl was our greatest source of help and suppor when it came to safety measures. We miss him very much.
Next month it's our turn to hand over our radio to the authorities. Mr. Kleiman  has a small set hidden in his home that he's giving us to replace our beautiful cabinet radio. It's a pity we have to turn in our big Philips, but when you're in hiding, you can't afford to bring the authorities down on your heads. Of course, we'll put the "baby" radio upstairs. What's a clandestine radio when there are already clandestine Jews and clandestine money?
All over the country people are trying to get hold of an old radio that they can hand over instead of their "morale booster." It's true: as the reports from outside grow worse and worse, the radio, with its wondrous voice, helps us not to lose heart and to keep telling ourselves, "Cheer up, keep your spirits high, things are bound to get better! "
Yours, Laurel
SUNDAY, JULY 11, 1943
Dear Kitty,
To get back to the subject of child-rearing (for the umpteenth time), let me tell you that I'm doing my best to be helpful, friendly and kind and to do all I can to keep the rain of rebukes down to a light drizzle. It's not easy trying to behave like a model child with people you can't stand, especially when you don't mean a word of it. But I can see that a little hypocrisy gets me a lot further than myoid method of saying exactly what I think (even though no one ever asks my opinion or cares one way or another). Of course, I often forget my role and find it impossible to curb my anger when they're unfair, so that they spend the next month saying the most impertinent girl in the world. Don't you think I'm to be pitied sometimes? It's a good thing I'm not the grouchy type, because then I might become sour and bad-tempered. I can usually see the humorous side of their scoldings, but it's easier when somebody else is being raked over the coals.
Further, I've decided (after a great deal of thought) to drop the shorthand. First, so that I have more time for my other subjects, and second, because of my eyes. That's a sad story. I've become very nearsighted and should have had glasses ages ago. (Ugh, won't I look like a dope! ). But as you know, people in hiding can't. . .
Yesterday all anyone here could talk about was Laurel's eyes, because Mother had suggested I go to the ophthalmologist with Mrs. Kleiman. Just hearing this made my knees weak, since it's no small matter. Going outside!  Just think of it, walking down the street!  I can't imagine it. I was petrified at first, and then glad. But it's not as simple as all that; the various authorities who had to approve such a step were unable to reach a quick  decision. They first had to carefully weigh all the difficulties and risks, though John was ready to set off immediately with me in tow. In the meantime, I'd taken my gray coat from the closet, but it was so small it looked as if it might have belonged to my little sister. We lowered the hem, but I still couldn't button it. I'm really curious to see what they decide, only I don't think they'll ever work out a plan, because the British have landed in Sicily and Father's all set for a "quick finish."
Bep's been giving Cliff and me a lot of office work to do. It makes us both feel important, and it's a big help to her. Anyone can file letters and make entries in a sales book, but we do it with remarkable accuracy.
John has so much to carry she looks like a pack mule. She goes forth nearly every day to scrounge up vegetables, and then bicycles back with her purchases in large shopping bags. She's also the one who brings five library books with her every Saturday. We long for Saturdays because that means books. We're like a bunch of little kids with a present. Ordinary people don't know how much books can mean to someone who's cooped up.
Our only diversions are reading, studying and listening to the radio.
Yours, Laurel
TUESDAY, JULY 13, 1943
The Best Little Table
Yesterday afternoon Father gave me permission to ask Mr. Bernie whether he would please be so good as to allow me (see how polite I am?) to use the table in our room two afternoons a week, from four to five-thirty. I already sit there every day from two-thirty to four while Bernie takes a nap, but the rest of the time the room and the table are off-limits to me. It's impossible to study next door in the afternoon, because there's too much going on. Besides, Father sometimes likes to sit at the desk during the afternoon.
So it seemed like a reasonable request, and I asked Bernie very politely. What do you think the learned gentleman's reply was? "No." Just plain "No! "
I was incensed and wasn't about to let myself be put off like that. I asked him the reason for his "No," but this didn't get me anywhere. The gist of his reply was: "I have to study too, you know, and if I can't do that in the afternoons, I won't be able to fit it in at all. I have to finish the task I've set for myself; otherwise, there's no point in starting. Besides, you aren't serious about your studies. Mythology -- what kind of work is that? Reading and knitting don't count either. I use that table and I'm not going to give it up! "I replied, "Mr. Bernie, I do take my wsork seriously. I can't study next door in the afternoons, and I would appreciate it if you would reconsider my request! "
Having said these words, the insulted Laurel turned around and pretended the learned doctor wasn't there. I was seething with rage and felt that Bernie had been incredibly rude (which he certainly had been) and that I'd been very polite. That evening, when I managed to get hold of Pim, I told him what had happened and we discussed what my next step should be, because I had no intention of giving up and preferred to deal with the matter myself. Pim gave me a rough idea of how to approach Bernie, but cautioned me to wait until the next day, since I was in such a flap. I ignored this last piece of advice and waited for Bernie after the dishes had been done. Pim was sitting next door and that had a calming effect.
I began, "Mr. Bernie, you seem to believe further discussion of the matter is pointless, but I beg you to reconsider."
Bernie gave me his most charming smile and said, "I'm always prepared to discuss the matter, even though it's already been settled."
I went on talking, despite Bernie's repeated interruptions. When you first came here," I said, "we agreed that the room was to be shared by the two of us. If we were to divide it fairly, you'd have the entire morning and I'd have the entire afternoon!  I'm not asking for that much, but two afternoons a week does seem reasonable to me."
Bernie leapt out of his chair as if he'd sat on a pin. "You have no business talking about your rights to the room. Where am I supposed to go? Maybe I should ask Mr. van Alyssia to build me a cubbyhole in the attic. You're not the only one who can't find a quiet place to work. You're always looking for a fight. If your sister Cliff, who has more right to work space than you do, had come to me with the same request, I'd never even have thought of refusing, but you. . ."
And once again he brought up the business about the mythology and the knitting, and once again Laurel was insulted. However, I showed no sign of it and let Bernie finish: "But no, it's impossible to talk to you. You're shamefully self-centered. No one else matters, as long as you get your way. I've never seen such a child. But after all is said and done, I'll be obliged to let you have your way, since I don't want people saying later on that Laurel Kali failed her exams because Mr. Bernie refused to relinquish his table! "
He went on and on until there was such a deluge of words I could hardly keep up. For one fleeting moment I thought, "Him and his lies. I'll smack his ugly mug so hard he'll go bouncing off the wall! " But the next moment I thought, "Calm down, he's not worth getting so upset about! "
At long last Mr. Bernie' s fury was spent, and he left the room with an expression of triumph mixed with wrath, his coat pockets bulging with food.
I went running over to Father and recounted the entire story, or at least those parts he hadn't been able to follow himself. rim decided to talk to Bernie that very same evening, and they spoke for more than half an hour.
They first discussed whether Laurel should be allowed to use the table, yes or no. Father said that he and Bernie had dealt with the subject once before, at which time he'd professed to agree with Bernie because he didn't want to contradict the elder in front of the younger, but that, even then, he hadn't thought it was fair. Bernie felt I had no right to talk as if he were an intruder laying claim to everything in sight. But Father protested strongly, since he himself had heard me say nothing of the kind. And so the conversation went back and forth, with Father defending my "selfishness" and my "busywork" and Bernie grumbling the whole time.
Bernie finally had to give in, and I was granted the opportunity to work without interruption two afternoons a week. Bernie looked very sullen, didn't speak to me for two days and made sure he occupied the table from five to five-thirty -- all very childish, of course.
Anyone who's so petty and pedantic at the age of fifty-four was born that way and is never going to change.
FRIDAY, JULY 16, 1943
Dearest Kitty,
There's been another break-in, but this time a real one!  Jarod went down to the warehouse this morning at seven, as usual, and noticed at once that both the warehouse door and the street door were open. He immediately reported this to Pim, who went to the private office, tuned the radio to a German station and locked the door. Then they both went back upstairs. In such cases our orders are not to wash ourselves or run any water, to be quiet, to be dressed by eight and not to go to the bathroom," and as usual we followed these to the letter. We were all glad we'd slept so well and hadn't heard anything. For a while we were indignant because no one from the office came upstairs the entire morning; Mr. Kleiman left us on tenterhooks until eleven-thirty. He told that the burglars had forced the outside door and the warehouse door with a crowbar, but when they didn't find anything worth stealing, they tried their luck on the next floor. They stole two cashboxes containing 40 guilders, blank checkbooks and, worst of all, coupons for 330 pounds of sugar, our entire allotment. It won't be easy to wangle new ones.
Mr. Kugler thinks this burglar belongs to the same gang as the one who made an unsuccessful attempt six weeks ago to open all three doors (the warehouse door and the two outside doors).
The burglary caused another stir, but the Laurelx seems to thrive on excitement. Naturally, we were glad the cash register and the typewriters had been safely tucked away in our clothes closet.
Yours, Laurel
PS. Landing in Sicily. Another step closer to the . . . ! 
MONDAY, JULY 19,1943
Dearest Kitty,
North France was very heavily bombed on Sunday. There was apparently a great deal of destruction. Entire streets are in ruins, and it will take a while for them to dig out all the bodies. So far there have been two hundred dead and countless wounded; the hospitals are bursting at the seams. We've been told of children searching forlornly in the smoldering ruins for their dead parents. It still makes me shiver to think of the dull, distant drone that signified the approaching destruction.
FRIDAY, JULY 23, 1943
Bep is currently able to get hold of notebooks, especially journals and ledgers, useful for my bookkeeping sister!  Other kinds are for sale as well, but don't ask what they're like or how long they'll last. At the moment \ they're all labeled "No Coupons Needed! " Like everything else you can purchase without ration stamps, they're i totally worthless. They consist of twelve sheets of gray I paper with narrow lines that slant across the page. Cliff is thinking about taking a course in calligraphy; I've advised her to go ahead and do it. Mother won't let me because of my eyes, but I think that's silly. Whether I do I that or something else, it all comes down to the same I thing.
Since you've never been through a war, Kitty, and since you know very little about life in hiding, in spite of my letters, let me tell you, just for fun, what we each want to do first when we're able to go outside again.
Cliff and Mr. van Alyssia wish, above all else, to have a hot bath, filled to the brim, which they can lie in for more than half an hour. Mrs. van Alyssia would like a cake, Bernie can think of nothing but seeing his Charlotte, and Mother is dying for a cup of real coffee. Father would like to visit Mr. Voskuijl, Jarod would go downtown, and as for me, I'd be so overjoyed I wouldn't know where to begin.
Most of all I long to have a home of our own, to be able to move around freely and have someone help me with my homework again, at last. In other words, to go back to school! 
Bep has offered to get us some fruit, at so-called bargain prices: grapes 2.50 guilders a pound, gooseberries 70 cents a pound, one peach 50 cents, melons 75 cents a pound. No wonder the papers write every evening in big, fat letters: "Keep Prices Down! "
MONDAY, JULY 26, 1943
Dear Kitty,
Yesterday was a very tumultuous day, and we're still all wound up. Actually, you may wonder if there's ever a day that passes without some kind of excitement.
The first warning siren went off in the morning while we were at breakfast, but we paid no attention, because it only meant that the planes were crossing the coast. I had a terrible headache, so I lay down for an hour after breakfast and then went to the office at around two.
At two-thirty Cliff had finished her office work and was just gathering her things together when the sirens began wailing again. So she and I trooped back upstairs. None too soon, it seems, for less than five minutes later the guns were booming so loudly that we went and stood in the hall. The house shook and the bombs kept falling. I was clutching my "escape bag," more because I wanted to have something to hold on to than because I wanted to run away. I know we can't leave here, but if we had to, being seen on the streets would be just as dangerous as getting caught in an air raid. After half an hour the drone of engines faded and the house began to hum with activity again. Jarod emerged from his lookout post in the front attic, Bernie remained in the front office, Mrs. van D. felt safest in the private office, Mr. van Alyssia had been watching from the loft, and those of us on the landing spread out to watch the columns of smoke rising from the harbor. Before long the smell of fire was everywhere, and outside it looked as if the city were enveloped in a thick fog.
A big fire like that is not a pleasant sight, but fortunately for us it was all over, and we went baCk to our various chores. Just as we were starting dinner: another air-raid alarm. The food was good, but I lost my appetite the moment I heard the siren. Nothing happened, however, and forty-five minutes later the all clear was sounded. After the dishes had been washed: another air-raid warning, gunfire and swarms of planes. "Oh, gosh, twice in one day," we thought, "that's twice in one day," we thought, "that's twice too many." Little good that did us, because once agai the bombs rained down, this time on the others of the city. According to British reports, Schiphol Airport was bombed. The planes dived and climbed, the air was abuzz with the drone of engines. It was very scary, and the whole time I kept thinking, "Here it comes, this is it."
I can assure you that when I went to bed at nine, my legs were still shaking. At the stroke of midnight I woke up again: more planes!  Bernie was undressing, but I took no notice and leapt up, wide awake, at the sound of the first shot. I stayed in Father's bed until one, in my own bed until one-thirty, and was back in Father's bed at two. But the planes kept on coming. At last they stopped firing and I was able to go back "home" again. I finally fell asleep at half past two.
Seven o'clock. I awoke with a start and sat up in bed. Mr. van Alyssia was with Father. My first thought was: burglars. "Everything," I heard Mr. van Alyssia say, and I thought everything had been stolen. But no, this time it was wonderful news, the best we've had in months, maybe even since the war began. Mussolini has resigned and the King of Italy has taken over the government.
We jumped for joy. After the awful events of yesterday, finally something good happens and brings us. . . hope!  Hope for an end to the war, hope for peace.
Mr. Kugler dropped by and told us that the Fokker aircraft factory had been hit hard. Meanwhile, there was another air-raid alarm this morning, with planes flying over, and another warning siren. I've had it up to here with alarms. I've hardly slept, and the last thing I want to do is work. But now the suspense about Italy and the hope that the war will be over by the end of the year are keeping us awake. .
Yours, Laurel
THURSDAY, JULY 29, 1943
Dearest Kitty,
Mrs. van Alyssia, Bernie and I were doing the dishes, and I was extremely quiet. This is very unusual for me and they were sure to notice, so in order to avoid any questions, I quickly racked my brains for a neutral topic. I thought the book Henry from Across the Street might fit the bill, but I couldn't have been more wrong; if Mrs. van Alyssia doesn't jump down my throat, Mr. Bernie does. It all boiled down to this: Mr. Bernie had recommended the book to Cliff and me as an example of excellent writing. We thought it was anything but that. The little boy had been portrayed well, but as for the rest. . . the less said the better. I mentioned something to that effect while we were doing the dishes, and Bernie launched into a veritable tirade.
"How can you possibly understand the psychology of a man? That of a child isn't so difficult [! ]. But you're far too young to read a book like that. Even a twenty-year-old man would be unable to comprehend it." (So why did he go out of his way to recommend it to Cliff and me?)
Mrs. van D. and Bernie continued their harangue: "You know way too much about things you're not supposed to. You've been brought up all wrong. Later on, when you're older, you won't be able to enjoy anything anymore. You'll say, 'Oh, I read that twenty years ago in some book.' You'd better hurry if you want to catch a husband or fall in love, since everything is bound to be a disappointment to you. You already know all there is to know in theory. But in practice? That's another story! "
Can you imagine how I felt? I astonished myself by calmly replying, "You may think I haven't been raised properly, but many people would disagree! "
They apparently believe that good child-rearing includes trying to pit me against my parents, since that's all they ever do. And not telling a girl my age about grown-up subjects is fine. We can all see what happens when. people are raised that way. at that moment I could have slapped them both for poking fun at me. I was beside myself with rage, and if I only knew how much longer we had to put up with each other's company, I'd start counting the days.
Mrs. van Alyssia's a fine one to talk!  She sets an example all right -- a bad one!  She's known to be exceedingly pushy, egotistical, cunning, calculating and perpetually dissatisfied. Add to that, vanity and coquettishness and there's no question about it: she's a thoroughly despicable person. I could write an entire book about Madame van Alyssia, and who knows, maybe someday I will. Anyone can put on a charming exterior when they want to. Mrs. van D. is friendly to strangers, especially men, so it's easy to make a mistake when you first get to know her.
Mother thinks that Mrs. van D. is too stupid for words, Cliff that she's too unimportant, Pim that she's too ugly (literally and figuratively! ), and after long observation (I'm never prejudiced at the beginning), I've come to the conclusion that she's all three of the above, and lots more besides. She has so many bad traits, why should I single out just one of them?
Yours, Laurel
P. S. Will the reader please take into consideration that this story was written before the writer's fury had cooled?
TUESDAY, AUGUST 3, 1943
Dearest Kitty,
Things are going well on the political front. Italy has banned the Fascist Party. The people are fighting the Fascists in many places -- even the army has joined the fight. How can a country like that continue to wage war against England?Our beautiful radio was taken away last week. Bernie was very angry at Mr. Kugler for turning it in on the appointed day. Bernie is slipping lower and lower in my estimation, and he's already below zero. hatever he says about politics, history, geography or ything else is so ridiculous that I hardly dare repeat it: Hitler will fade from history; the harbor in Rotterdam is bigger than the one in Hamburg; the English are idiots for not taking the opportunity to bomb Italy to smithereens; etc., etc.
We just had a third air raid. I decided to grit my teeth and practice being courageous.
Mrs. van Alyssia, the one who always said "Let them fall" and "Better to end with a bang than not to end at all," is the most cowardly one among us. She was shaking like a leaf this morning and even burst into tears. She was comforted by her husband, with whom she recently declared a truce after a week of squabbling; I nearly got sentimental at the sight.
Mouschi has now proved, beyond a shadow of a doubt, that having a cat has disadvantages as well as advantages. The whole house is crawling with fleas, and it's getting worse each day. Mr. Kleiman sprinkled yellow powder in every nook and cranny, but the fleas haven't taken the slightest notice. It's making us all very jittery; we're forever imagining a bite on our arms and legs or other parts of our bodies, so we leap up and do a few exercises, since it gives us an excuse to take a better look at our arms or necks. But now we're paying the price for having had so little physical exercise; we're so stiff we can hardly turn our heads. The real calisthenics fell by the wayside long ago.
Yours, Laurel
WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 4,1943
Dearest Kitty,
Now that we've been in hiding for a little over a year, you know a great deal about our lives. Still, I can't possibly tell you everything, since it's all so different compared to ordinary times and ordinary people. Nevertheless, to give you a closer look into our lives, from time to time I'll describe part of an ordinary day. I'll start with the evening and night.
Nine in the evening. Bedtime always begins in the Laurelx with an enormous hustle and bustle. Chairs are shifted, beds pulled out, blankets unfolded -- nothing stays where it is during the daytime. I sleep on a small divan, which is only five feet long, so we have to add a few chairs to make it longer. Comforter, sheets, pillows, blankets: everything has to be removed from Bernie' s bed, where it's kept during the day.
In the next room there's a terrible creaking: that's Cliff's folding bed being set up. More blankets and pillows, anything to make the wooden slats a bit more comfortable. Upstairs it sounds like thunder, but it's only Mrs. van D.'s bed being shoved against the window so that Her Majesty, arrayed in her pink bed jacket, can sniff the night air through her delicate little nostrils.
Nine o'clock. After Jarod's finished, it's my turn for the bathroom. I wash myself from head to toe, and more often than not I find a tiny flea floating in the sink (only during the hot months, weeks or days). I brush my teeth, curl my hair, manicure my nails and dab peroxide on my upper lip to bleach the black hairs -- all this in less than half an hour.
Nine-thirty. I throw on my bathrobe. With soap in one hand, and potty, hairpins, panties, curlers and a wad of cotton in the other, I hurry out of the bathroom. The next in line invariably calls me back to remove the gracefully curved but unsightly hairs that I've left in the sink.
Ten o'clock. Time to put up the blackout screen and say good-night. For the next fifteen minutes, at least, the house is filled with the creaking of beds and the sigh of broken springs, and then, provided our upstairs neighbors aren't having a marital spat in bed, all is quiet.
Eleven-thirty. The bathroom door creaks. A narrow strip of light falls into the room. Squeaking shoes, a large coat, even larger than the man inside it . . . Bernie is returning from his nightly work in Mr. Kugler's office. I hear him shuffiing back and forth for ten whole minutes, the rustle of paper (from the food he's tucking away in his cupboard) and the bed being made up. Then the figure disappears again, and the only sound is the occasional suspicious noise from the bathroom.
Approximately three o'clock. I have to get up to use the tin can under my bed, which, to be on the safe side, has a rubber mat underneath in case of leaks. I always hold my breath while I go, since it clatters into the can like a brook down a mountainside. The potty is returned to its place, and the figure in the white nightgown (the one that causes Cliff to exclaim every evening, "Oh, that indecent nighty! ") climbs back into bed. A certain somebody lies awake for about fifteen minutes, listening to the sounds of the night. In the first place, to hear whether there are any burglars downstairs, and then to the various beds -- upstairs, next door and in my room -- to tell whether the others are asleep or half awake. This is no fun, especially when it concerns a member of the family named Dr. Bernie. First, there's the sound of a fish gasping for air, and this is repeated nine or ten times. Then, the lips are moistened profusely. This is alternated with little smacking sounds, followed by a long period of tossing and turning and rearranging the pillows. After five minutes of perfect quiet, the same sequence repeats itself three more times, after which he's presumably lulled himself back to sleep for a while.
Sometimes the guns go off during the night, between one and four. I'm never aware of it before it happens, but all of a sudden I find myself standing beside my bed, out of sheer habit. Occasionally I'm dreaming so deeply (of irregular French verbs or a quarrel upstairs) that I realize only when my dream is over that the shooting has stopped and that I've remained quietly in my room. But usually I wake up. Then I grab a pillow and a handkerchief, throw on my robe and slippers and dash next door to Father, just the way Cliff described in this birthday poem:
When shots rino out in the dark of night,The door creaks open and into sightCome a hanky, a pillow, a figure in white. . .
Once I've reached the big bed, the worst is over, except when the shooting is extra loud.
Six forty-five. Brrring . . . the alarm clock, which raises its shrill voice at any hour of the day or night, whether you want it to or not. Creak. . . wham. . . Mrs. van D. turns it off. Screak . . . Mr. van D. gets up, puts on the water and races to the bathroom.
Seven-fifteen. The door creaks again. Bernie can go to the bathroom. Alone at last, I remove the blackout screen . . . and a new day begins in the Laurelx.
Yours, Laurel
THURSDAY, AUGUST 5, 1943
Dearest Kitty,
Today let's talk about the lunch break.
It's twelve-thirty. The whole gang breathes a sigh of relief: Mr. van Maaren, the man with the shady past, andMr. de Kok have gone home for lunch.
Upstairs you can hear the thud of the vacuum cleaner on Mrs. van D.'s beautiful and only rug. Cliff tucks a few books under her arm and heads for the class for "slow learners," which is what Bernie seems to be. Pim goes and sits in a corner with his constant companion, Dickens, in hopes of finding a bit of peace and quiet. Mother hastens upstairs to help the busy little housewife, and I tidy up both the bathroom and myself at the same time.
Twelve forty-five. One by one they trickle in: first Mr.
Gies and then either Mr. Kleiman or Mr. Kugler, followed by Bep and sometimes even John.
One. Clustered around the radio, they all listen raptly to the BBC. This is the only time the members of the Laurelx family don't interrupt each other, since even Mr. van Alyssia can't argue with the speaker.
One-fifteen. Food distribution. Everyone from downstairs gets a cup of soup, plus dessert, if there happens to be any. A contented Mr. Gies sits on the divan or leans against the desk with his newspaper, cup and usually the cat at his side. If one of the three is missing, he doesn't hesitate to let his protest be heard. Mr. Kleiman relates the latest news from town, and he's an excellent source. Mr. Kugler hurries up the stairs, gives a short but solid knock on the door and comes in either wringing his hands or rubbing them in glee, depending on whether he's quiet and in a bad mood or talkative and in a good mood.
One forty-five. Everyone rises from the table and goes about their business. Cliff and Mother do the dishes, Mr. and Mrs. van D. head for the divan, Jarod for the attic, Father for his divan, Bernie too, and Laurel does her homework.
What comes next is the quietest hour of the day; when they're all asleep, there are no disturbances. To judge by his face, Bernie is dreaming of food. But I don't look at him long, because the time whizzes by and before you know it, it'll be 4 P. M. and the pedantic Dr. Bernie will be standing with the clock in his hand because I'm one minute ,late clearing off the table.
Yours, Laurel
SATURDAY, AUGUST 7, 1943
Dearest Kitty,
A few weeks ago I started writing a story, something I made up from beginning to end, and I've enjoyed it so much that the products of my pen are piling up.
Yours, Laurel
MONDAY, AUGUST 9, 1943
Dearest Kitty,
We now continue with a typical day in the Laurelx. Since we've already had lunch, it's time to describe dinner.
Mr. van Alyssia. Is served first, and takes a generous portion of whatever he likes. Usually joins in the conversation, never fails to give his opinion. Once he's spoken, his word is final. If anyone dares to suggest otherwise, Mr. van D. can put up a good fight. Oh, he can hiss like a cat. . . but I'd rather he didn't. Once you've seen it, you never want to see it again. His opinion is the best, he knows the most about everything. Granted, the man has a good head on his shoulders, but it's swelled to no small degree.
Madame. Actually, the best thing would be to say nothing. Some days, especially when a foul mood is on the way, her face is hard to read. If you analyze the discussions, you realize she's not the subject, but the guilty party!  A fact everyone prefers to ignore. Even so, you could call her the instigator. Stirring up trouble, now that's what Mrs. van Alyssia calls fun. Stirring up trouble between Mrs. Kali and Laurel. Cliff and Mr. Kali aren t qwte as easy.
But let's return to the table. Mrs. van D. may think she doesn't always get enough, but that's not the case. The choicest potatoes, the tastiest morsel, the tenderest bit of whatever there is, that's Madame's motto. The others can all have their turn, as long as I get the best. (Exactly what she accuses Laurel Kali of doing.) Her second watchword is: keep talking. As long as somebody's listening, it doesn't seem to occur to her to wonder whether they're interested. She must think that whatever Mrs. van Alyssia says will interest everyone.
Smile coquettishly, pretend you know everything, offer everyone a piece of advice and mother them -- that's sure to make a good impression. But if you take a better look, the good impression fades. One, she's hardworking; two, cheerful; three, coquettish -- and sometimes a cute face. That's Petronella van Alyssia.
The third diner. Says very little. Young Mr. van Alyssia is usually quiet and hardly makes his presence known. As far as his appetite is concerned, he's a Danaldean vessel that never gets full. Even after the most substantial meal, he can look you calmly in the eye and claim he could have eaten twice as much.
Number four -- Cliff. Eats like a bird and doesn't talk at all. She eats only vegetables and fruit. "Spoiled," in the opinion of the van Alyssias. "Too little exercise and fresh air," in ours.
Beside her -- Mama. Has a hearty appetite, does her share of the talking. No one has the impression, as they do with Mrs. van Alyssia, that this is a housewife. What's the difference between the two? Well, Mrs. van D. does the cooking and Mother does the dishes and polishes the furniture. Numbers six and seven. I won't say much about Father and me. The former is the most modest person at the table. He always looks to see whether the others have been served first. He needs nothing for himself; the best things are for the children. He's goodness personified. Seated next to him is the Laurelx's little bundle of nerves.
Bernie. Help yourself, keep your eyes on the food, eat and don't talk. And if you have to say something, then for goodness' sake talk about food. That doesn't lead to quarrels, just to bragging. He consumes enormous portions, and "no" is not part of his vocabulary, whether the food is good or bad.
Pants that come up to his chest, a red jacket, black patent-leather slippers and horn-rimmed glasses -- that's how he looks when he's at work at the little table, always studying and never progressing. This is interrupted only by his afternoon nap, food and -- his favorite spot -- the bathroom. Three, four or five  times a day there's bound to be someone waiting outside the bathroom door, hopping impatiently from one foot to another, trying to hold it in and barely managing. Does Bernie care? Not a whit. From seven-fifteen to seven-thirty, from twelve-thirty to one, from two to two-fifteen, from four to four-fifteen, from six to six-fifteen, from eleven-thirty to twelve. You can set your watch by them; these are the times for his "regular sessions." He never deviates or lets himself be swayed by the voices outside the door, begging him to open up before a disaster occurs.
Number nine is not part of our Laurelx family, although she does share our house and table. Hep has a healthy appetite. She cleans her plate and isn't choosy. Hep's easy to please and that pleases us. She can be characterized as follows: cheerful, good-humored, kind and willing.
TUESDAY, AUGUST 10, 1943
Dearest Kitty, .
A new idea: during meals I talk more to myself than to the others, which has two advantages. First, they're glad they don't have to listen to my continuous chatter, and second, I don't have to get annoyed by their opinions. I don't think my opinions are stupid but other people do, so it's better to keep them to myself. I apply the same tactic when I have to eat something I loathe. I put the dish in front of me, pretend it's delicious, avoid looking at it as much as possible, and it's gone before I've had time to realize what it is. When I get up in the morning, another very disagreeable moment, I leap out of bed, think to myself, "You'll be slipping back under the covers soon," walk to the window, take down the blackout screen, sniff at the crack until I feel a bit of fresh air, and I'm awake. I strip the bed as fast as I can so I won't be tempted to get back in. Do you know what Mother calls this sort of thing? The art of living. Isn't that a funny expression?
We've all been a little confused this past week because our dearly beloved Westertoren bells have been carted off to be melted down for the war, so we have no idea of the exact time, either night or day. I still have hopes that they'll come up with a substitute, made of tin or copper or some such thing, to remind the neighborhood of the clock.
Everywhere I go, upstairs or down, they all cast admiring glances at my feet, which are adorned by a pair of exceptionally beautiful (for times like these! ) shoes. John managed to snap them up for 27.50 guilders. Burgundy-colored suede and leather with medium-sized high heels. I feel as if I were on stilts, and look even taller than I already am.
Yesterday was my unlucky day. I pricked my right thumb with the blunt end of a big needle. As a result, Cliff had to peel potatoes for me (take the good with the bad), and writing was awkward. Then I bumped into the cupboard door so hard it nearly knocked me over, and was scolded for making such a racket. They wouldn't let me run water to bathe my forehead, so now I'm walking around with a giant lump over my right eye. To make matters worse, the little toe on my right foot got stuck in the vacuum cleaner. It bled and hurt, but my other ailments were already causing me so much trouble that I let this one slide, which was stupid of me, because now I'm walking around with an infected toe. What with the salve, the gauze and the tape, I can't get my heavenly new shoe on my foot.
Bernie has put us in danger for the umpteenth time. He actually had John bring him a book, an anti-Mussolini tirade, which has been banned. On the way here she was knocked down by an SS motorcycle. She lost her head and shouted "You brutes! " and went on her way. I don't dare think what would have happened if she'd been taken down to headquarters.
Yours, Laurel
A Daily Chore in Our Little Community: Peeling Potatoes! 
One person goes to get some newspapers; another, the knives (keeping the best for himself, of course); the third, the potatoes; and the fourth, the water.
Mr. Bernie begins. He may not always peel them very well, but he does peel nonstop, glancing left and right to see if everyone is doing it the way he does. No, they're not! "Look, Laurel, I am taking peeler in my hand like so and going from the top to bottom!  Nein, not so . . . but so! "
"I think my way is easier, Mr. Bernie," I say tentatively.
"But this is best way, Laurel. This you can take from me. Of course, it is no matter, you do the way you want."
We go on peeling. I glance at Bernie out of the corner of my eye. Lost in thought, he shakes his head (over me, no doubt), but says no more.
I keep on peeling. Then I look at Father, on the other side of me. To Father, peeling potatoes is not a chore, but precision work. When he reads, he has a deep wrinkle in the back of his head. But when he's preparing potatoes, beans or vegetables, he seems to be totally absorbed in his task. He puts on his potato-peeling face, and when it's set in that particular way, it would be impossible for him to turn out anything less than a perfectly peeled potato.
I keep on working. I glance up for a second, but that's all the time I need. Mrs. van D. is trying to attract Bernie's attention. She starts by looking in his direction, but Bernie pretends not to notice. She winks, but Bernie goes on peeling. She laughs, but Bernie still doesn't look up. Then Mother laughs too, but Bernie pays them no mind. Having failed to achieve her goal, Mrs. van D. is obliged to change tactics. There's a brief silence. Then she says, "Putti, why don't you put on an apron? Otherwise, I'll have to spend all day tomorrow trying to get the spots out of your suit! "
"I'm not getting it dirty."
Another brief silence. "Putti, why don't you sit down?'"I'm fine this way. I like standing up! "Silence.
"Putti, look out, du spritzt schon! ".* [*Now you're splashing! ]
"I know, Mommy, but I'm being careful."
Mrs. van D. casts about for another topic. "Tell me, Putti, why aren't the British carrying out any bombing raids today?"
"Because the weather's bad, Kerli! "
"But yesterday it was such nice weather and they weren't flying then either."
"Let's drop the subject."
"Why? Can't a person talk about that or offer an opinion?'"Well, why in the world not?"
"Oh, be quiet, Mammichen! "* [*Mommy]
"Mr. Kali always answers his wife."
Mr. van D. is trying to control himself. This remark always rubs him the wrong way, but Mrs. van D.'s not one to quit: "Oh, there's never going to be an invasion! "Mr. van D. turns white, and when she notices it, Mrs. van D. turns red, but she's not about to be deterred: "The British aren't doing a thing! "The bomb bursts. "And now shut up, Donnerwetter noch mal! * [*For crying out loud! "]
Mother can barely stifle a laugh, and I stare straight ahead.
Scenes like these are repeated almost daily, unless they've just had a terrible fight. In that case, neither Mr. nor Mrs. van D. says a word.
It's time for me to get some more potatoes. I go up to the attic, where Jarod is busy picking fleas from the cat.
He looks up, the cat notices it, and whoosh. . . he's gone. Out the window and into the rain gutter.
Jarod swears; I laugh and slip out of the room.
Freedom in the Laurelx
Five-thirty. Bep's arrival signals the beginning of our nightly freedom. Things get going right away. I go upstairs with Bep, who usually has her dessert before the rest of us. The moment she sits down, Mrs. van D. begins stating her wishes. Her list usually starts with "Oh, by the way, Bep, something else I'd like. . ." Bep winks at me. Mrs. van D. doesn't miss a chance to make her wishes known to whoever comes upstairs. It must be one of the reasons none of them like to go up there.
Five forty-five. Bep leaves. I go down two floors to have a look around: first to the kitchen, then to the private office and then to the coal bin to open the cat door for Mouschi.
After a long tour of inspection, I wind up in Mr. Kugler's office. Mr. van Alyssia is combing all the drawers and files for today's mail. Jarod picks up Boche and the warehouse key; Pim lugs the typewriters upstairs; Cliff looks around for a quiet place to do her office work; Mrs. van D. puts a kettle of water on the stove; Mother comes down the stairs with a pan of potatoes; we all know our jobs.
Soon Jarod comes back from the warehouse. The first question they ask him is whether he's remembered the bread. No, he hasn't. He crouches before the door to the front office to make himself as small as possible and crawls on his hands and knees to the steel cabinet, takes out the bread and starts to leave. At any rate, that's what he intends to do, but before he knows what's happened, Mouschi has jumped over him and gone to sit under the desk.
Jarod looks all around him. Aha, there's the cat!  He crawls back into the office and grabs the cat by the tail. Mouschi hisses, Jarod sighs. What has he accomplished? Mouschi's now sitting by the window licking herself, very pleased at having escaped Jarod's clutches. Jarod has no choice but to lure her with a piece of bread. Mouschi takes the bait, follows him out, and the door closes.
I watch the entire scene through a crack in the door.
Mr. van Alyssia is angry and slams the door. Cliff and I exchange looks and think the same thing: he must have worked himself into a rage again because of some blunder on Mr. Kugler's part, and he's forgotten all about the Keg Company next door.
Another step is heard in the hallway. Bernie comes in, goes toward the window with an air of propriety, sniffs. . . coughs, sneezes and clears his throat. He's out of luck -- it was pepper. He continues on to the front office. The curtains are open, which means he can't get at his writing paper. He disappears with a scowl.
Cliff and I exchange another glance. "One less page for his sweetheart tomorrow," I hear her say. I nod in agreement.
An elephant's tread is heard on the stairway. It's Bernie, seeking comfort in his favorite spot.
We continue working. Knock, knock, knock. . . Three taps means dinnertime! 
MONDAY, AUGUST 23, 1943
Wenn Die Uhr Halb Neune Schlaat . . .* [* When the clock strikes half past eight.]
Cliff and Mother are nervous. "Shh . . . Father. Be quiet, Sonya. Shh . . . Pim!  It's eight-thirty.
Come here, you can't run the water anymore. Walk softly! " A sample of what's said to Father in the bathroom. At the stroke of half past eight, he has to be in the living room. No running water, no flushing toilet, no walking around, no noise whatsoever. As long as the office staff hasn't arrived, sounds travel more easily to the warehouse.
The door opens upstairs at eight-twenty, and this is followed by three gentle taps on the floor. . . Laurel's hot cereal. I clamber up the stairs to get my doggie dish.
Back downstairs, everything has to be done quickly, quickly: I comb my hair, put away the potty, shove the bed back in place. Quiet!  The clock is striking eight-thirty!  Mrs. van D. changes shoes and shuffles through the room in her slippers; Mr. van D. too -- a veritable Charlie Chaplin. All is quiet.
The ideal family scene has now reached its high point. I want to read or study and Cliff does too. Father and Mother ditto. Father is sitting (with Dickens and the dictionary, of course) on the edge of the sagging, squeaky bed, which doesn't even have a decent mattress. Two bolsters can be piled on top of each other. "I don't need these," he thinks. "I can manage without them! "
Once he starts reading, he doesn't look up. He laughs now and then and tries to get Mother to read a story."I don't have the time right now! "
He looks disappointed, but then continues to read.
A little while later, when he comes across another good passage, he tries again: "You have to read this, Mother! "
Mother sits on the folding bed, either reading, sewing, knitting or studying, whichever is next on her list. An idea suddenly occurs to her, and she quickly says, so as not to forget, "Laurel, remember to . . . Cliff, jot this down. . . "
After a while it's quiet again. Cliff slams her book shut; Father knits his forehead, his eyebrows forming a funny curve and his wrinkle of concentration reappearing I at the back of his head, and he buries himself in his book 1 again; Mother starts chatting with Cliff; and I get curious and listen too. Pim is drawn into the conversation . . . Nine o'clock. Breakfast! 
FRIDAY, SEPTEMBER 10, 1943
Dearest Kitty,
Every time I write to you, something special has happened, usually unpleasant rather than pleasant. This time, however, something wonderful is going on.
On Wednesday, September 8, we were listening to the seven o'clock news when we heard an announcement: "Here is some of the best news of the war so far: Italy has capitulated." Italy has unconditionally surrendered!  The Dutch broadcast from England began at eight-fifteen with the news: "Listeners, an hour and fifteen minutes ago, just as I finished writing my daily report, we received the wonderful news of Italy's capitulation. I tell you, I never tossed my notes into the wastepaper basket with more delight than I did today! "
"God Save the King," the American national anthem and the Russian' 'Internationale" were played. As always, the Dutch program was uplifting without being too optimistic.
The British have landed in Naples. Northern Italy is occupied by the Germans. The truce was signed on Friday, September 3, the day the British landed in Italy. The Germans are ranting and raving in all the newspapers at the treachery of Badoglio and the Italian king.
Still, there's bad news as well. It's about Mr. Kleiman. As you know, we all like him very much. He's unfailingly cheerful and amazingly brave, despite the fact that he's always sick and in pain and can't eat much or do a lot of walking. "When Mr. Kleiman enters a room, the sun begins to shine," Mother said recently, and she's absolutely right.
Now it seems he has to go to the hospital for a very difficult operation on his stomach, and will have to stay there for at least four weeks. You should have seen him when he told us good-bye. He acted so normally, as though he were just off to do an errand.
Yours, Laurel
THURSDAY, SEPTEMBER 16, 1943
Dearest Kitty,
Relationships here in the Laurelx are getting worse all the time. We don't dare open our mouths at mealtime (except to slip in a bite of food), because no matter what we say, someone is bound to resent it or take it the wrong way. Mr. Voskuijl occasionally comes to visit us. Unfortunately, he's not doing very well. He isn't making it any easier for his family, because his attitude seems to be: what do I care, I'm going to die anyway!  When I think how touchy everyone is here, I can just imagine what it must be like at the Voskuijls'.
I've been taking valerian every day to fight the anxiety and depression, but it doesn't stop me from being even more miserable the next day. A good hearty laugh would help better than ten valerian drops, but we've almost forgotten how to laugh. Sometimes I'm afraid my face is going to sag with all this sorrow and that my mouth is going to permanently droop at the corners. The others aren't doing any better. Everyone here is dreading the great terror known as winter.
Another fact that doesn't exactly brighten up our days is that Mr. van Maaren, the man who works in the warehouse, is getting suspicious about the Laurelx. A person with any brains must have noticed by now that John sometimes says she's going to the lab, Bep to the file room and Mr. Kleiman to the Opekta supplies, while Mr. Kugler claims the Laurelx doesn't belong to this building at all, but to the one next door.
We wouldn't care what Mr. van Maaren thought of the situation except that he's known to be unreliable and to possess a high degree of curiosity. He's not one who can be put off with a flimsy excuse.
One day Mr. Kugler wanted to be extra cautious, so at twenty past twelve he put on his coat and went to the drugstore around the corner. Less than five minutes later he was back, and he sneaked up the stairs like a thief to visit us. At one-fifteen he started to leave, but Bep met him on the landing and warned him that van Maaren was in the office. Mr. Kugler did an about-face and stayed with us until one-thirty. Then he took off his shoes and went in his stockinged feet (despite his cold) to the front attic and down the other stairway, taking one step at a time to avoid the creaks. It took him fifteen minutes to negotiate the stairs, but he wound up safely in the office after having entered from the outside.
In the meantime, Bep had gotten rid of van Maaren and come to get Mr. Kugler from the Laurelx. But he'd already left and at that moment was still tiptoeing down the stairs. What must the passersby have thought when they saw the manager putting on his shoes outside? Hey, you there, in the socks! 
Yours, Laurel
WEDNESDAY, SEPTEMBER 29, 1943
Dearest Kitty,
It's Mrs. van Alyssia's birthday. Other than one ration stamp each for cheese, meat and bread, all she received from us was a jar of jam. Her husband, Bernie and the office staff gave her nothing but flowers and also food. Such are the times we live in! 
Bep had a nervous fit last week because she had so many errands to do. Ten times a day people were sending her out for something, each time insisting she go right away or go again or that she'd done it all wrong. And when you think that she has her regular office work to do, that Mr. Kleiman is sick, that John is home with a cold and that Bep herself has a sprained ankle, boyfriend troubles and a grouchy father, it's no wonder she's at the end of her tether. We comforted her and told her that if she'd put her foot down once or twice and say she didn't have the time, the shopping lists would shrink of their own accord.
Saturday there was a big drama, the likes of which have never been seen here before. It started with a discussion of van Maaren and ended in a general argument and tears. Bernie complained to Mother that he was being treated like a leper, that no one was friendly to him and that, after all, he hadn't done anything to deserve it. This was followed by a lot of sweet talk, which luckily Mother didn't fall for this time. She told him we were disappointed in him and that, on more than one occasion, he'd been a source of great annoyance. Bernie promised her the moon, but, as usual, we haven't seen so much as a beam.
There's trouble brewing with the van Alyssias, I can tell!  Father's furious because they're cheating us: they've been holding back meat and other things. Oh, what kind of bombshell is about to burst now? If only I weren't so involved in all these skirmishes!  If only I could leave here!  They're driving us crazy! 
Yours, Laurel
SUNDAY, OCTOBER 17, 1943
Dearest Kitty,
Mr. Kleiman is back, thank goodness!  He looks a bit pale, and yet he cheerfully set off to sell some clothes for Mr. van Alyssia. The disagreeable fact is that Mr. van Alyssia has run out of money. He lost his last hundred guilders in the warehouse, which is still creating trouble for us: the men are wondering how a hundred guilders could wind up in the warehouse on a Monday morning. Suspicion abounds. Meanwhile, the hundred guilders have been stolen. Who's the thief?
But I was talking about the money shortage. Mrs. van D. has scads of dresses, coats and shoes, none of which she feels she can do without. Mr. van D.'s suit is difficult to sell, and Jarod's bike was put on the block, but is back again, since nobody wanted it. But the story doesn't end there. You see, Mrs. van D. is going to have to part with her fur coat. In her opinion, the firm should pay for our upkeep, but that's ridiculous. They just had a flaming row about it and have entered the "oh, my sweet Putti" and "darling Kerli" stage of reconciliation.
My mind boggles at the profanity this honorable house has had to endure in the past month. Father walks around with his lips pressed together, and whenever he hears his name, he looks up in alarm, as ifhe's afraid he'll be called upon to resolve another delicate problem. Mother's so wrought up her cheeks are blotched with red, Cliff complains of headaches, Bernie can't sleep, Mrs. van D. frets and fumes all day long, and I've gone completely round the bend. To tell you the truth, I sometimes forget who we're at odds with and who we're not. The only way to take my mind off it is to study, and I've been doing a lot of that lately.
Yours, Laurel
FRIDAY, OCTOBER 29,1943
My dearest Kitty,
Mr. Kleiman is out again; his stomach won't give him a moment's peace. He doesn't even know whether it's stopped bleeding. He came to tell us he wasn't feeling well and was going home, and for the first time he seemed really down.
Mr. and Mrs. van D. have had more raging battles. The reason is simple: they're broke. They wanted to sell an overcoat and a suit of Mr. van D. 's, but were unable to find any buyers. His prices were way too high.
Some time ago Mr. Kleiman was talking about a furrier he knows. This gave Mr. van D. the idea of selling his wife's fur coat. It's made of rabbit skin, and she's had it for seventeen years. Mrs. van D. got 325 guilders for it, an enormous amount. She wanted to keep the money herself to buy new clothes after the war, and it took some doing before Mr. van D. could make her understand that it was desperately needed to cover household expenses.
You can't imagine the screaming, shouting, stamping of feet and swearing that went on. It was terrifying. My family stood holding its breath at the bottom of the stairs, in case it might be necessary to drag them apart. All the bickering, tears and nervous tension have become such a stress and strain that I fall into my bed at night crying and thanking my lucky stars that I have half an hour to myself.
I'm doing fine, except I've got no appetite. I keep hearing: "Goodness, you look awful! " I must admit they're doing their best to keep me in condition: they're plying me with dextrose, cod-liver oil, brewer's yeast and calcium. My nerves often get the better of me, especially on Sundays; that's when I really feel miserable. The atmosphere is stifling, sluggish, leaden. Outside, you don't hear a single bird, and a deathly, oppressive silence hangs over the house and clings to me as if it were going to drag me into the deepest regions of the underworld. At times like these, Father, Mother and Cliff don't matter to me in the least. I wander from room to room, climb up and down the stairs and feel like a songbird whose wings have been ripped off and who keeps hurling itself against the bars of its dark cage. "Let me out, where there's fresh air and laughter! " a voice within me cries. I don't even bother to reply anymore, but lie down on the divan. Sleep makes the silence and the terrible fear go by more quickly, helps pass the time, since it's impossible to kill it.
Yours, Laurel
WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 3, 1943
Dearest Kitty,
To take our minds off matters as well as to develop them, Father ordered a catalog from a correspondence school. Cliff pored through the thick brochure three times without finding anything to her liking and within her budget. Father was easier to satisfy and decided to write and ask for a trial lesson in "Elementary Latin." No sooner said than done. The lesson arrived, Cliff set to work enthusiastically and decided to take the course, despite the expense. It's much too hard for me, though I'd really like to learn Latin.
To give me a new project as well, Father asked Mr. Kleiman for a children's Bible so I could finally learn something about the New Testament.
"Are you planning to give Laurel a Bible for Hanukkah?" Cliff asked, somewhat perturbed.
"Yes. . . Well, maybe St. Nicholas Day would be a better occasion," Father replied.
Jesus and Hanukkah don't exactly go together.
Since the vacuum cleaner's broken, I have to take an old brush to the rug every night. The window's closed, the light's on, the stove's burning, and there I am brushing away at the rug. "That's sure to be a problem," I thought to myself the first time. "There're bound to be complaints." I was right: Mother got a headache from the thick clouds of dust whirling around the room, Cliff's new Latin dictionary was caked with dirt, and rim grumbled that the floor didn't look any different anyway. Small thanks for my pains.
We've decided that from now on the stove is going to be lit at seven-thirty on Sunday mornings instead of five-thirty. I think it's risky. What will the neighbors think of our smoking chimney?
It's the same with the curtains. Ever since we first went into hiding, they've been tacked firmly to the windows. Sometimes one of the ladies or gentlemen can't resist the urge to peek outside. The result: a storm of reproaches. The response: "Oh, nobody will notice." That's how every act of carelessness begins and ends. No one will notice, no one will hear, no one will pay the least bit of attention. Easy to say, but is it true?
At the moment, the tempestuous quarrels have subsided; only Bernie and the van Alyssias are still at loggerheads. When Bernie is talking about Mrs. van D., he invariably calls her' 'that old bat" or "that stupid hag," and conversely, Mrs. van D. refers to our ever so learned gentleman as an "old maid" or a "touchy neurotic spinster, etc.
The pot calling the kettle black! 
Yours, Laurel
MONDAY EVENING, NOVEMBER 8,1943Dearest Kitty,
If you were to read all my letters in one sitting, you'd be struck by the fact that they were written in a variety of moods. It annoys me to be so dependent on the moods here in the Laurelx, but I'm not the only one: we're all subject to them. If I'm engrossed in a book, I have to rearrange my thoughts before I can mingle with other people, because otherwise they might think I was strange. As you can see, I'm currently in the middle of a depression. I couldn't really tell you what set it off, but I think it stems from my cowardice, which confronts me at every turn. This evening, when Bep was still here, the doorbell rang long and loud. I instantly turned white, my stomach churned, and my heart beat wildly -- and all because I was afraid.
At night in bed I see myself alone in a dungeon, without Father and Mother. Or I'm roaming the streets, or the Laurelx is on fire, or they come in the middle of the night to take us away and I crawl under my bed in desperation. I see everything as if it were actually taking place. And to think it might all happen soon! 
John often says she envies us because we have such peace and quiet here. That may be true, but she's obviously not thinking about our fear. I simply can't imagine the world will ever be normal again for us. I do talk about "after the war," but it's as if I were talking about a castle in the air, something that can Ii never come true. I see the ei ght of us in the Laurelx as if we were a patch of blue sky surrounded by menacing black clouds. The perfectly round spot on which we're standing is still safe, but the clouds are moving in on us, and the ring between us and the approaching danger is being pulled tighter and tighter. We're surrounded by darkness and danger, and in our desperate search for a way out we keep bumping into each other. We look at the fighting down below and the peace and beauty up above. In the meantime, we've been cut off by the dark mass of clouds, so that we can go neither up nor down. It looms before us like an impenetrable wall, trying to crush us, but not yet able to. I can only cry out and implore, "Oh, ring, ring, open wide and let us out! "
Yours, Laurel
THURSDAY, NOVEMBER 11, 1943
Dearest Kitty,
I have a good title for this chapter:
Ode to My Fountain Pen
In Memoriam
My fountain pen was always one of my most prized possessions; I valued it highly, especially because it had a thick nib, and I can only write neatly with thick nibs. It has led a long and interesting fountain-pen life, which I will summarize below.
When I was nine, my fountain pen (packed in cotton) arrived as a "sample of no commercial value" all the way from Aachen, where my grandmother (the kindly donor) used to live. I lay in bed with the flu, while the February winds howled around the apartment house. This splendid fountain pen came in a red leather case, and I showed it to my girlfriends the first chance I got. Me, Laurel Kali, the proud owner of a fountain pen.
When I was ten, I was allowed to take the pen to school, and to my surprise, the teacher even let me write with it. When I was eleven, however, my treasure had to be tucked away again, because my sixth-grade teacher allowed us to use only school pens and inkpots. When I was twelve, I started at the Jewish Lyceum and my fountain pen was given a new case in honor of the occasion. Not only did it have room for a pencil, it also had a zipper, which was much more impressive. When I was thirteen, the fountain pen went with me to the Laurelx, and together we've raced through countless diaries and compositions. I'd turned fourteen and my fountain pen was enjoying the last year of its life with me when . . .
It was just after five on Friday afternoon. I came out of my room and was about to sit down at the table to write when I was roughly pushed to one side to make room for Cliff and Father, who wanted to practice their Latin. The fountain pen remained unused on the table, while its owner, sighing, was forced to make do with a very tiny corner of the table, where she began rubbing beans. That's how we remove mold from the beans and restore them to their original state. At a quarter to six I swept the floor, dumped the dirt into a news paper, along with the rotten beans, and tossed it into the stove. A giant flame shot up, and I thought it was wonderful that the stove, which had been gasping its last breath, had made such a miraculous recovery.
All was quiet again. The Latin students had left, and I sat down at the table to pick up where I'd left off. But no matter where I looked, my fountain pen was nowhere in sight. I took another look. Cliff looked, Mother looked, Father looked, Bernie looked. But it had vanished.
"Maybe it fell in the stove, along with the beans! " Cliff suggested.
"No, it couldn't have! " I replied.
But that evening, when my fountain pen still hadn't turned up, we all assumed it had been burned, especially because celluloid is highly inflammable. Our darkest fears were confirmed the next day when Father went to empty the stove and discovered the clip, used to fasten it to a pocket, among the ashes. Not a trace of the gold nib was left. "It must have melted into stone," Father conjectured.
I'm left with one consolation, small though it may be: my fountain pen was cremated, just as I would like to be someday! 
Yours, Laurel
WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 17, 1943
Dearest Kitty,
Recent events have the house rocking on its foundations. Owing to an outbreak of diphtheria at Bep's, she won't be allowed to come in contact with us for six weeks. Without her, the cooking and shopping will be very difficult, not to mention how much we'll miss her company. Mr. Kleiman is still in bed and has eaten nothing but gruel for three weeks. Mr. Kugler is up to his neck in work.
Cliff sends her Latin lessons to a teacher, who corrects and then returns them. She's registered under Bep's name. The teacher's very nice, and witty too. I bet he's glad to have such a smart student.
Bernie is in a turmoil and we don't know why. It all began with Bernie's saying nothing when he was upstairs; he didn't exchange so much as a word with either Mr. or Mrs. van Alyssia. We all noticed it. This went on for a few days, and then Mother took the opportunity to warn him about Mrs. van D., who could make life miserable for him. Bernie said Mr. van Alyssia had started the silent treatment and he had no intention of breaking it. I should explain that yesterday was November 16, the first anniversary of his living in the Laurelx. Mother received a plant in honor of the occasion, but Mrs. van Alyssia, who had alluded to the date for weeks and made no bones about the fact that she thought Bernie should treat us to dinner, received nothing. Instead of making use of the opportunity to thank us -- for the first time -- for unselfishly taking him in, he didn't utter a word. And on the morning of the sixteenth, when I asked him whether I should offer him my congratulations or my condolences, he replied that either one would do. Mother, having cast herself in the role of peacemaker, made no headway whatsoever, and the situation finally ended in a draw.
I can say without exaggeration that Bernie has definitely got a screw loose. We often laugh to ourselves because he has no memory, no fixed opinions and no common sense. He's amused us more than once by trying to pass on the news he's just heard, since the message invariably gets garbled in transmission. Furthermore, he answers every reproach or accusation with a load of fine 1\ promises, which he never manages to keep."Der Mann hat einen grossen GeistUna ist so klein van Taten! "*[*A well-known expression: 
"The spirit of the man is great,How puny are his deeds." 
Yours, Laurel 
SATURDAY, NOVEMBER 27, 1943 
Dearest Kitty, 
Last night, just as I was falling asleep, Hanneli suddenly appeared before me. I saw her there, dressed in rags, her face thin and worn. She looked at me with such sadness and reproach in her enormous eyes that I could read the message in them: "Oh, Laurel, why have you deserted me? Help me, help me, rescue me from this hell! "
And I can't help her. I can only stand by and watch while other people suffer and die. All I can do is pray to God to bring her back to us. I saw Hanneli, and no one else, and I understood why. I misjudged her, wasn't mature enough to understand how difficult it was for her. She was devoted to her girlfriend, and it must have seemed as though I were trying to take her away. The poor thing, she must have felt awful!  I know, because I recognize the feeling in myself!  I had an occasional flash of understanding, but then got selfishly wrapped up again in my own problems and pleasures.
It was mean of me to treat her that way, and now she was looking at me, oh so helplessly, with her pale face and beseeching eyes. If only I could help her!  Dear God, I have everything I could wish for, while fate has her in its deadly clutches. She was as devout as I am, maybe even more so, and she too wanted to do what was right. But then why have I been chosen to live, while she's probably going to die? What's the difference between us? Why are we now so far apart?
To be honest, I hadn't thought of her for months -- no, for at least a year. I hadn't forgotten her entirely, and yet it wasn't until I saw her before me that I thought of all her suffering.
Oh, Hanneli, I hope that if you live to the end of the war and return to us, I'll be able to take you in and make up for the wrong I've done you.
But even if I were ever in a position to help, she wouldn't need it more than she does now. I wonder if she ever thinks of me, and what she's feeling?
Merciful God, comfort her, so that at least she won't be alone. Oh, if only You could tell her I'm thinking of her with compassion and love, it might help her go on.
I've got to stop dwelling on this. It won't get me anywhere. I keep seeing her enormous eyes, and they haunt me. Does Hanneli really and truly believe in God, or has religion merely been foisted upon her? I don't even know that. I never took the trouble to ask.
Hanneli, Hanneli, if only I could take you away, if only I could share everything I have with you. It's too late. I can't help, or undo the wrong I've done. But I'll never forget her again and I'll always pray for her! 
Yours, Laurel 
MONDAY, DECEMBER 6, 1943
Dearest Kitty,
The closer it got to St. Nicholas Day, the more we all thought back to last year's festively decorated basket.
More than anyone, I thought it would be terrible to skip a celebration this year. After long deliberation, I finally came up with an idea, something funny. I consulted rim, and a week ago we set to work writing a verse for each person.
Sunday evening at a quarter to eight we trooped upstairs carrying the big laundry basket, which had been decorated with cutouts and bows made of pink and blue carbon paper. On top was a large piece of brown wrapping paper with a note attached. Everyone was rather amazed at the sheer size of the gift. I removed the note and read it aloud:
"Once again St. Nicholas Day
Has even come to our hideaway;
It won't be quite as Jun, I fear,As the happy day we had last year.
Then we were hopeful, no reason to doubtThat optimism would win the bout,And by the time this year came round,We'd all be free, and s* and sound.
Still, let's not Jorget it's St. Nicholas Day,Though we've nothing left to give away.
We'll have to find something else to do:
So everyone please look in their shoe! "
As each person took their own shoe out of the basket, there was a roar of laughter. Inside each shoe was a little wrapped package addressed to its owner.
Yours, Laurel
Dearest Kitty,
A bad case of flu has prevented me from writing to you until today. Being sick here is dreadful. With every cough, I had to duck under the blanket -- once, twice, three times -- and try to keep from coughing anymore.
Most of the time the tickle refused to go away, so I had to drink milk with honey, sugar or cough drops. I get dizzy just thinking about all the cures I've been subjected to: sweating out the fever, steam treatment, wet compresses, dry compresses, hot drinks, swabbing my throat, lying still, heating pad, hot-water bottles, lemonade and, every two hours, the thermometer. Will these remedies really make you better? The worst part was when Mr. Bernie decided to play doctor and lay his pomaded head on my bare chest to listen to the sounds. Not only did his hair tickle, but I was embarrassed, even though he went to school thirty years ago and does have some kind of medical degree. Why should he lay his head on my heart? After all, he's not my boyfriend!  For that matter, he wouldn't be able to tell a healthy sound from an unhealthy one.
He'd have to have his ears cleaned first, since he's becoming alarmingly hard of hearing. But enough about my illness. I'm fit as a fiddle again. I've grown almost half an inch and gained two pounds. I'm pale, but itching to get back to my books.
Ausnahmsweise* (the only word that will do here [* By way of exception]), we're all getting on well together. No squabbles, though that probably won't last long. There hasn't been such peace and quiet in this house for at least six months.
Bep is still in isolation, but any day now her sister will no longer be contagious.
For Christmas, we're getting extra cooking oil, candy and molasses. For Hanukkah, Mr. Bernie gave Mrs. van Alyssia and Mother a beautiful cake, which he'd asked John to bake. On top of all the work she has to do!  Cliff and I received a brooch made out of a penny, all bright and shiny. I can't really describe it, but it's lovely.
I also have a Christmas present for John and Bep. For a whole month I've saved up the sugar I put on my hot cereal, and Mr. Kleiman has used it to have fondant made.
The weather is drizzly and overcast, the stove stinks, and the food lies heavily on our stomachs, producing a variety of rumbles.
The war is at an impasse, spirits are low. Yours, Laurel
FRIDAY, DECEMBER 24, 1943
Dear Kitty,
As I've written you many times before, moods have a tendency to affect us quite a bit here, and in my case it's been getting worse lately. "Himmelhoch jauchzend, zu Tode betru'bt"* [* A famous line from Goethe: "On top of the world, or in the depths of despair."] certainly applies to me. I'm "on top of the world" when I think of how fortunate we are and compare myself to other Jewish children, and "in the depths of despair" when, for example, Mrs. Kleiman comes by and talks about Jopie's hockey club, canoe trips, school plays and afternoon teas with friends.
I don't think I'm jealous of Jopie, but I long to have a really good time for once and to laugh so hard it hurts.
We're stuck in this house like lepers, especially during winter and the Christmas and New Year's holidays. Actually, I shouldn't even be writing this, since it makes me seem so ungrateful, but I can't keep everything to myself, so I'll repeat what I said at the beginning: "Paper is more patient than people."
Whenever someone comes in from outside, with the wind in their clothes and the cold on their cheeks, I feel like burying my head under the blankets to keep from thinking, "When will we be allowed to breathe fresh air again?" I can't do that -- on the contrary, I have to hold my head up high and put a bold face on things, but the thoughts keep coming anyway. Not just once, but over and over.
Believe me, if you've been shut up for a year and a half, it can get to be too much for you sometimes. But feelings can't be ignored, no matter how unjust or ungrateful they seem. I long to ride a bike, dance, whistle, look at the world, feel young and know that I'm free, and yet I can't let it show. just imagine what would happen if all eight of us were to feel sorry for ourselves or walk around with the discontent clearly visible on our faces. Where would that get us? I sometimes wonder if anyone will ever understand what I mean, if anyone will ever overlook my ingratitude and not worry about whether or not I'm Jewish and merely see me as a teenager badly in need of some good plain fun. I don't know, and I wouldn't be able to talk about it with anyone, since I'm sure I'd start to cry. Crying can bring relief, as long as you don't cry alone. Despite all my theories and efforts, I miss -- every day and every hour of the day -- having a mother who understands me. That's why with everything I do and write, I imagine the kind of mom I'd like to be to my children later on. The kind of mom who doesn't take everything people say too seriously, but who does take me seriously. I find it difficult to describe what I mean, but the word' 'mom" says it all. Do you know what I've come up with? In order to give me the feeling of calling my mother something that sounds like "Mom," I often call her" Momsy." Sometimes I shorten it to "Moms"; an imperfect "Mom." I wish I could honor her by removing the "s." It's a good thing she doesn't realize this, since it would only make her unhappy.
Well, that's enough of that. My writing has raised me somewhat from "the depths of despair."
Yours, Laurel
It's the day after Christmas, and I can't help thinking about Pim and the story he told me this time last year. I didn't understand the meaning of his words then as well as I do now. If only he'd bring it up again, I might be able to show him I understood what he meant! 
I think Pim told me because he, who knows the "intimate secrets" of so many others, needed to express his own feelings for once; Pim never talks about himself, and I don't think Cliff has any inkling of what he's been through. Poor Pim, he can't fool me into thinking he's forgotten that girl. He never will. It's made him very accommodating, since he's not blind to Mother's faults. I hope I'm going to be a little like him, without having to go through what he has! 
Laurel
MONDAY, DECEMBER 27, 1943
Friday evening, for the first time in my life, I received a Christmas present. Mr. Kleiman, Mr. Kugler and the girls had prepared a wonderful surprise for us. John made a delicious Christmas cake with "Peace 1944" written on top, and Bep provided a batch of cookies that was up to prewar standards.
There was a jar of yogurt for Jarod, Cliff and me, and a bottle of beer for each of the adults. And once again everything was wrapped so nicely, with pretty pictures glued to the packages. For the rest, the holidays passed by quickly for us.
Laurel
WEDNESDAY, DECEMBER 29, 1943
I was very sad again last night. Grandma and Hanneli came to me once more. Grandma, oh, my sweet Grandma. How little we understood what she suffered, how kind she always was and what an interest she took in everything that concerned us. And to think that all that time she was carefully guarding her terrible secret. * [*Laurel's grandmother was terminally ill.]
Grandma was always so loyal and good. She would never have let any of us down. Whatever happened, no matter how much I misbehaved, Grandma always stuck up for me. Grandma, did you love me, or did you not understand me either? I don't know. How lonely Grandma must have been, in spite of us. You can be lonely even when you're loved by many people, since you're still not bd'"dI" any 0 y s one an only.
And Hanneli? Is she still alive? What's she doing? Dear God, watch over her and bring her back to us. Hanneli, you're a reminder of what my fate might have been. I keep seeing myself in your place. So why am I often miserable about what goes on here? Shouldn't I be happy, contented and glad, except when I'm thinking of Hanneli and those suffering along with her? I'm selfish and cowardly. Why do I always think and dream the most awful things and want to scream in terror? Because, in spite of everything, I still don't have enough faith in God. He's given me so much, which I don't deserve, and yet each day I make so many mistakes! Thinking about the suffering of those you hold dear can reduce you to tears; in fact, you could spend the whole day crying. The most you can do is pray for God to perform a miracle and save at least some of them. And I hope I'm doing enough of that! 
Laurel
THURSDAY, DECEMBER 30, 1943
Dearest Kitty,
Since the last raging quarrels, things have settled down here, not only between ourselves, Bernie and "upstairs," but also between Mr. and Mrs. van D. Nevertheless, a few dark thunderclouds are heading this way, and all because of . . . food. Mrs. van D. came up with the ridiculous idea of frying fewer potatoes in the morning and saving them for later in the day. Mother and Bernie and the rest of us didn't agree with her, so now we're dividing up the potatoes as well. It seems the fats and oils aren't being doled out fairly, and Mother's going to have to put a stop to it. I'll let you know if there are any interesting developments. For the last few months now we've been splitting up the meat (theirs with fat, ours without), the soup (they eat it, we don't), the potatoes (theirs peeled, ours not), the extras and now the fried potatoes too. If only we could split up completely! 
Yours, Laurel
P. S. Bep had a picture postcard of the entire Royal Family copied for me. Juliana looks very young, and so does the Queen. The three little girls are adorable. It was incredibly nice of Bep, don't you think?
SUNDAY, JANUARY 2, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
This morning, when I had nothing to do, I leafed through the pages of my letter and came across so many letters dealing with the subject of "Mother" in such strong terms that I was shocked. I said to myself, "Laurel, is that really you talking about hate? Oh, Laurel, how could you?"
I continued to sit with the open book in my hand and wonder why I was filled with so much anger and hate that I had to confide it all to you. I tried to understand the Laurel of last year and make apologies for her, because as long as I leave you with these accusations and don't attempt to explain what prompted them, my conscience won't be clear. I was suffering then (and still do) from moods that kept my head under water (figuratively speaking) and allowed me to see things only from my own perspective, without calmly considering what the others -- those whom I, with my mercurial temperament, had hurt or offended -- had said, and then acting as they would have done.
I hid inside myself, thought of no one but myself and calmly wrote down all my joy, sarcasm and sorrow in my letter. Because this letter has become a kind of memory book, it means a great deal to me, but I could easily write "over and done with" on many of its pages.
I was furious at Mother (and still am a lot of the time). It's true, she didn't understand me, but I didn't understand her either. Because she loved me, she was tender and affectionate, but because of the difficult situations I put her in, and the sad circumstances in which she found herself, she was nervous and irritable, so I can understand why she was often short with me.
I was offended, took it far too much to heart and was insolent and beastly to her, which, in turn, made her unhappy. We were caught in a vicious circle of unpleasantness and sorrow. Not a very happy period for either of us, but at least it's coming to an end. I didn't want to see what was going on, and I felt very sorry for myself, but that's understandable too.
Those violent outbursts on paper are simply expressions of anger that, in normal life, I could have worked off by locking myself in my room and stamping my foot a few times or calling Mother names behind her back.
The period of tearfully passing judgment on Mother is over. I've grown wiser and Mother's nerves are a bit steadier. Most of the time I manage to hold my tongue when I'm annoyed, and she does too; so on the surface, we seem to be getting along better. But there's one thing I can't do, and that's to love Mother with the devotion of a child.
I soothe my conscience with the thought that it's better for unkind words to be down on paper than for Mother to have to carry them around in her heart.
Yours, Laurel
THURSDAY, JANUARY 6, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
Today I have two things to confess. It's going to take a long time, but I have to tell them to someone, and you're the most likely candidate, since I know you'll keep a secret, no matter what happens.
The first is about Mother. As you know, I've frequently complained about her and then tried my best to be nice. I've suddenly realized what's wrong with her. Mother has said that she sees us more as friends than as daughters. That's all very nice, of course, except that a friend can't take the place of a mother. I need my mother to set a good example and be a person I can respect, but in most matters she's an example of what not to do. I have the feeling that Cliff thinks so differently about these things that she'd never be able to understand what I've just told you. And Father avoids all conversations having to do with Mother.
I imagine a mother as a woman who, first and foremost, possesses a great deal of tact, especially toward her adolescent children, and not one who, like Momsy, pokes fun at me when I cry. Not because I'm in pain, but because of other things.
This may seem trivial, but there's one incident I've never forgiven her for. It happened one day when I had to go to the dentist. Mother and Cliff planned to go with me and agreed I should take my bicycle. When the dentist was finished and we were back outside, Cliff and Mother very sweetly informed me that they were going downtown to buy or look at something, I don't remember what, and of course I wanted to go along. But they said I couldn't come because I had my bike with me. Tears of rage rushed to my eyes, and Cliff and Mother began laughing at me. I was so furious that I stuck my tongue out at them, right there on the street. A little old lady happened to be passing by, and she looked terribly shocked. I rode my bike home and must have cried for hours. Strangely enough, even though Mother has wounded me thousands of times, this particular wound still stings whenever I think of how angry I was.
I find it difficult to confess the second one because it's about myself. I'm not prudish, Kitty, and yet every time they give a blow-by-blow account of their trips to the bathroom, which they often do, my whole body rises in revolt. Yesterday I read an article on blushing by Sis Heyster. It was as if she'd addressed it directly to me. Not that I blush easily, but the rest of the article did apply. What she basically says is that during puberty girls withdraw into themselves and begin thinking about the wondrous changes taking place in their bodies. I feel that too, which probably accounts for my recent embarrassment over Cliff, Mother and Father. On the other hand, Cliff is a lot shyer than I am, and yet she's not in the least embarrassed.
I think that what's happening to me is so wonderful, and I don't just mean the changes taking place on the outside of my body, but also those on the inside. I never discuss myself or any of these things with others, which is why I have to talk about them to myself. Whenever I get my period (and that's only been three times), I have the feeling that in spite of all the pain, discomfort and mess, I'm carrying around a sweet secret. So even though it's a nuisance, in a certain way I'm always looking forward to the time when I'll feel that secret inside me once again.
Sis Heyster also writes that girls my age feel very insecure about themselves and are just beginning to discover that they're individuals with their own ideas, thoughts and habits. I'd just turned thirteen when I came here, so I started thinking about myself and realized that I've become an "independent person" sooner than most girls. Sometimes when I lie in bed at night I feel a terrible urge to touch my breasts and listen to the quiet, steady beating of my heart.
Unconsciously, I had these feelings even before I came here. Once when I was spending the night at Jacque's, I could no longer restrain my curiosity about her body, which she'd always hidden from me and which I'd never seen. I asked her whether, as proof of our friendiship, we could touch each other's breasts. Jacque refused.
I also had a terrible desire to kiss her, which I did. Every time I see a female nude, such as the Venus in my art history book, I go into ecstasy. Sometimes I find them so exquisite I have to struggle to hold back my tears. If only I had a girlfriend! 
THURSDAY, JANUARY 6, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
My longing for someone to talk to has become so unbearable that I somehow took it into my head to select Jarod for this role. On the few occasions when I have gone to Jarod's room during the day, I've always thought it was nice and cozy. But Jarod's too polite to show someone the door when they're bothering him, so I've never dared to stay long. I've always been afraid he'd think I was a pest. I've been looking for an excuse to linger in his room and get him talking without his noticing, and yesterday I got my chance. Jarod, you see, is currently going through a crossword-puzzle craze, and he doesn't do anything else all day. I was helping him, and we soon wound up sitting across from each other at his table, Jarod on the chair and me on the divan.
It gave me a wonderful feeling when I looked into his dark blue eyes and saw how bashful my unexpected visit had made him. I could read his innermost thoughts, and in his face I saw a look of helplessness and uncertainty as to how to behave, and at the same time a flicker of awareness of his masculinity. I saw his shyness, and I melted. I wanted to say, "Tell me about yourself. Look beneath my chatty exterior." But I found that it was easier to think up questions than to ask them.
The evening came to a close, and nothing happened, except that I told him about the article on blushing. Not what I wrote you, of course, just that he would grow more secure as he got older. "
That night I lay in bed and cried my eyes out, all the i while making sure no one could hear me. The idea that I had to beg Jarod for favors was simply revolting. But people will do almost anything to satisfy their longings; take me, for example, I've made up my mind to visit Jarod more often and, somehow, get him to talk to me.
You mustn't think I'm in love with Jarod, because I'm not. If the van Alyssias had had a daughter instead of a son, I'd have tried to make friends with her.
This morning I woke up just before seven and immediately remembered what I'd been dreaming about. I was sitting on a chair and across from me was Jarod. . . Jarod Schiff. We were looking at a book of drawings by Mary Bos. The dream was so vivid I can even remember some of the drawings. But that wasn't all -- the dream went on. Jarod's eyes suddenly met mine, and I stared for a long time into those velvety brown eyes. Then he said very softly, "If I'd only known, I'd have come to you long ago! " I turned abruptly away, overcome by emotion. And then I felt a soft, oh-so-cool and gentle cheek against mine, and it felt so good, so good . . .
At that point I woke up, still feeling his cheek against mine and his brown eyes staring deep into my heart, so deep that he could read how much I'd loved him and how much I still do. Again my eyes filled with tears, and I was sad because I'd lost him once more, and yet at the same time glad because I knew with certainty that Jarod is still the only one for me. '
It's funny, but I often have such vivid images in my dreams. One night I saw Grammy* [*Grammy is Laurel's grandmother on her father's side, and Grandma her grandmother on her mother's side.] so clearly that I could even make out her skin of soft, crinkly velvet. Another time Grandma appeared to me as a guardian angel. After that it was Hanneli, who still symbolizes to me the suffering of my friends as well as that of Jews in general, so that when I'm praying for her, I'm also praying for all the Jews and all those in need.
And now Jarod, my dearest Jarod. I've never had such a clear mental image of him. I don't need a photograph, I can see him oh so well.
Yours, Laurel
FRIDAY, ]ANUARY 7, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
I'm such an idiot. I forgot that I haven't yet told you the story of my one true love.
When I was a little girl, way back in kindergarten, I took a liking to Sally Kimmel. His father was gone, and he and his mother lived with an aunt. One of Sally's cousins was a good-looking, slender, dark-haired boy named Appy, who later turned out to look like a movie idol and aroused more admiration than the short, comical, chubby Sally. For a long time we went everywhere together, but aside from that, my love was unrequited until Jarod crossed my path. I had an out-and-out crush on him. He liked me too, and we were inseparable for one whole summer. I can still see us walking hand in hand through our neighborhood, Jarod in a white cotton suit and me in a short summer dress. At the end of the summer vacation he went to the seventh grade at the middle school, while I was in the sixth grade at the grammar school. He'd pick me up on the way home, or I'd pick him up. Jarod was the ideal boy: tall, good-looking and slender, with a serious, quiet and intelligent face. He had dark hair, beautiful brown eyes, ruddy cheeks and a nicely pointed nose. I was crazy about his smile, which made him look so boyish and mischievous.
I'd gone away to the countryside during summer vacation, and when I came back, Jarod was no longer at his old address; he'd moved and was living with a much older boy, who apparently told him I was just a kid, because Jarod stopped seeing me. I loved him so much that I didn't want to face the truth. I kept clinging to him until the day I finally realized that if I continued to chase after him, people would say I was boy-crazy.
The years went by. Jarod hung around with girls his own age and no longer bothered to say hello to me. I started school at the Jewish Lyceum, and several boys in my class were in love with me. I enjoyed it and felt honored by their attentions, but that was all. Later on, Hello had a terrible crush on me, but as I've already told you, I never fell in love again.
There's a saying: "Time heals all wounds." That's how it was with me. I told myself I'd forgotten Jarod and no longer liked him in the least. But my memories of him were so strong that I had to admit to myself that the only reason I no longer liked him was that I was jealous of the other girls. This morning I realized that nothing has changed; on the contrary, as I've grown older and more mature, my love has grown along with me. I can understand now that Jarod thought I was childish, and yet it still hurts to think he'd forgotten me completely. I saw his face so clearly; I knew for certain that no one but Jarod could have stuck in my mind that way.
I've been in an utter state of confusion today. When Father kissed me this morning, I wanted to shout, "Oh, if only you were Jarod! " I've been thinking of him constantly, and all day long I've been repeating to myself, "Oh, Petel, my darling, darling Petel . . ."
Where can I find help? I simply have to go on living and praying to God that, if we ever get out of here, Jarod's path will cross mine and he'll gaze into my eyes, read the love in them and say, "Oh, Laurel, if I'd only known, I'd have come to you long ago."
Once when Father and I were talking about sex, he said I was too young to understand that kind of desire. But I thought I did understand it, and now I'm sure I do. Nothing is as dear to me now as my darling Petel! 
I saw my face in the mirror, and it looked so different. My eyes were clear and deep, my cheeks were rosy, which they hadn't been in weeks, my mouth was much softer. I looked happy, and yet there was something so sad in my expression that the smile immediately faded from my lips. I'm not happy, since I know Petel's not thinking of me, and yet I can still feel his beautiful eyes gazing at me and his cool, soft cheek against mine. . . Oh, Petel, Petel, how am I ever going to free myself from your image? Wouldn't anyone who took your place be a poor substitute? I love you, with a love so great that it simply couldn't keep growing inside my heart, but had to leap out and reveal itself in all its magnitude.
A week ago, even a day ago, if you'd asked me, "Which of your friends do you think you'd be most likely to marry?" I'd have answered, "Sally, since he makes me feel good, peaceful and safe! " But now I'd cry, "Petel, because I love him with all my heart and all my soul. I surrender myself completely! " Except for that one thing: he may touch my face, but that's as far as it goes.
This morning I imagined I was in the front attic with Petel, sitting on the floor by the windows, and after talking for a while, we both began to cry. Moments later I felt his mouth and his wonderful cheek!  Oh, Petel, come to me. Think of me, my dearest Petel! 
WEDNESDAY, JANUARY 12, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
Bep's been back for the last two weeks, though her sister won't be allowed back at school until next week. Bep herself spent two days in bed with a bad cold. John and Jan were also out for two days, with upset stomachs.
I'm currently going through a dance and ballet craze and am diligently practicing my dance steps every evening. I've made an ultramodern dance costume out of a lacy lavender slip belonging to Momsy. Bias tape is threaded through the top and tied just above the bust. A pink corded ribbon completes the ensemble. I tried to turn my tennis shoes into ballet slippers, but with no success. My stiff limbs are well on the way to becoming as limber as they used to be. A terrific exercise is to sit on the floor, place a heel in each hand and raise both legs in the air. I have to sit on a cushion, because otherwise my poor backside really takes a beating.
Everyone here is reading a book called A Cloudless Morning. Mother thought it was extremely good because it describes a number of adolescent problems. I thought to myself, a bit ironically, "Why don't you take more interest in your own adolescents first! "
I think Mother believes that Cliff and I have a better relationship with our parents than anyone in the whole wide world, and that no mother is more involved in the lives of her children than she is. She must have my sister in mind, since I don't believe Cliff has the same problems and thoughts as I do. Far be it from me to point out to Mother that one of her daughters is not at all what she imagines. She'd be completely bewildered, and anyway, she'd never be able to change; I'd like to spare her that grief, especially since I know that everything would remain the same. Mother does sense that Cliff loves her much more than I do, but she thinks I'm just going through a phase.
Cliff's gotten much nicer. She seems a lot different than she used to be. She's not nearly as catty these days and is becoming a real friend. She no longer thinks of me as a litde kid who doesn't count.
It's funny, but I can sometimes see myself as others see me. I take a leisurely look at the person called "Laurel Kali" and browse through the pages of her life as though she were a stranger.
Before I came here, when I didn't think about things as much as I do now, I occasionally had the feeling that I didn't belong to Momsy, Pim and Cliff and that I would always be an outsider. I sometimes went around for six months at a time pretending I was an orphan. Then I'd chastise myself for playing the victim, when really, I'd always been so fortunate. After that I'd force myself to be friendly for a while. Every morning when I heard footsteps on the stairs, I hoped it would be Mother coming to say good morning. I'd greet her warmly, because I honesly did look forward to her affectionate glance. But then she'd snap at me for having made some comment or other (and I'd go off to school feeling completely discouraged.
On the way home I'd make excuses for her, telling myself that she had so many worries. I'd arrive home in high spirits, chatting nineteen to the dozen, until the events of the morning would repeat themselves and I'd leave the room with my schoolbag in my hand and a pensive look on my face. Sometimes I'd decide to stay angry, but then I always had so much to talk about after school that I'd forget my resolution and want Mother to stop whatever she was doing and lend a willing ear. Then the time would come once more when I no longer listened for the steps on the stairs and felt lonely and cried into my pillow every night.
Everything has gotten much worse here. But you already knew that. Now God has sent someone to help me: Jarod. I fondle my pendant, press it to my lips and think, "What do I care!  Petel is mine and nobody knows it! " With this in mind, I can rise above every nasty remark. Which of the people here would suspect that so much is going on in the mind of a teenage girl?
SATURDAY, JANUARY 15, 1944
My dearest Kitty,
There's no reason for me to go on describing all our quarrels and arguments down to the last detail. It's enough to tell you that we've divided many things like meat and fats and oils and are frying our own potatoes. Recently we've been eating a little extra rye bread because by four o'clock we're so hungry for dinner we can barely control our rumbling stomachs.
Mother's birthday is rapidly approaching. She received some extra sugar from Mr. Kugler, which sparked off jealousy on the part of the van Alyssias, because Mrs. van D. didn't receive any on her birthday. But what's the point of boring you with harsh words, spiteful conversations and tears when you know they bore us even more?
Mother has expressed a wish, which isn't likely to come true any time soon: not to have to see Mr. van Alyssia's face for two whole weeks. I wonder if everyone who shares a house sooner or later ends up at odds with their fellow residents. Or have we just had a stroke of bad luck? At mealtime, when Bernie helps himself to a quarter of the half-filled gravy boat and leaves the rest of us to do without, I lose my appetite and feel like jumping to my feet, knocking him off his chair and throwing him out the door.
Are most people so stingy and selfish? I've gained some insight into human nature since I came here, which is good, but I've had enough for the present. Jarod says the same.
The war is going to go on despite our quarrels and our longing for freedom and fresh air, so we should try to make the best of our stay here.
I'm preaching, but I also believe that if I live here much longer, I'll turn into a dried-up old beanstalk. And all I really want is to be an honest-to-goodness teenager! 
Yours, Laurel
WEDNESDAY EVENING, JANUARY 19, 1944Dearest Kitty,
I (there I go again! ) don't know what's happened, but since my dream I keep noticing how I've changed. By the way, I dreamed about Jarod again last night and once again I felt his eyes penetrate mine, but this dream was less vivid and not quite as beautiful as the last.
You know that I always used to be jealous of Cliff's relationship with Father. There's not a trace of my jealousy left now; I still feel hurt when Father's nerves cause him to be unreasonable toward me, but then I think, "I can't blame you for being the way you are. You talk so much about the minds of children and adolescents, but you don't know the first thing about them! " I long for more than Father's affection, more than his hugs and kisses. Isn't it awful of me to be so preoccupied with myself? Shouldn't I, who want to be good and kind, forgive them first? I forgive Mother too, but every time she makes a sarcastic remark or laughs at me, it's all I can do to control myself.
I know I'm far from being what I should; will I ever be?
Laurel Kali
P. S. Father asked if I told you about the cake. For Mother's birthday, she received a real mocha cake, prewar quality, from the office. It was a really nice day!  But at the moment there's no room in my head for things like that.
SATURDAY, JANUARY 22, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
Can you tell me why people go to such lengths to hide their real selves? Or why I always behave very differently when I'm in the company of others? Why do people have so little trust in one another? I know there must be a reason, but sometimes I think it's horrible that you can't ever confide in anyone, not even those closest to you.
It seems as if I've grown up since the night I had that dream, as if I've become more independent. You'll be amazed when I tell you that even my attitude toward the van Alyssias has changed. I've stopped looking at all the discussions and arguments from my family's biased point of view. What's brought on such a radical change? Well, you see, I suddenly realized that if Mother had been different, if she'd been a real mom, our relationship would have been very, very different. Mrs. van Alyssia is by no means a wonderful person, yet half the arguments could have been avoided if Mother hadn't been so hard to deal with every time they got onto a tricky subject. Mrs. van Alyssia does have one good point, though: you can talk to her. She may be selfish, stingy and underhanded, but she'll readily back down as long as you don't provoke her and make her unreasonable. This tactic doesn't work every time, but if you're patient, you can keep trying and see how far you get.
All the conflicts about our upbringing, about not pampering children, about the food -- about everything, absolutely everything -- might have taken a different turn if we'd remained open and on friendly terms instead of always seeing the worst side.
I know exactly what you're going to say, Kitty.
"But, Laurel, are these words really coming from your lips? From you, who have had to put up with so many unkind words from upstairs? From you, who are aware of all the injustices?"
And yet they are coming from me. I want to take a fresh look at things and form my own opinion, not just ape my parents, as in the proverb "The apple never falls far from the tree." I want to reexamine the van Alyssias and decide for myself what's true and what's been blown out of proportion. If I wind up being disappointed in them, I can always side with Father and Mother. But if not, I can try to change their attitude. And if that doesn't work, I'll have to stick with my own opinions and judgment. I'll take every opportunity to speak openly to Mrs. van D. about our many differences and not be afraid --  despite my reputation as a smart aleck -- to offer my impartial opinion. I won't say anything negative about my own family, though that doesn't mean I won't defend them if somebody else does, and as of today, my gossiping is a thing of the past.
Up to now I was absolutely convinced that the van Alyssias were entirely to blame for the quarrels, but now I'm sure the fault was largely ours. We were right as far as the subject matter was concerned, but intelligent people (such as ourselves! ) should have more insight into how to deal with others.
I hope I've got at least a touch of that insight, and that I'll find an occasion to put it to good use.
Yours, Laurel
MONDAY, JANUARY 24, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
A very strange thing has happened to me. (Actually, "happened" isn't quite the right word.)
Before I came here, whenever anyone at home or at school talked about sex, they were either secretive or disgusting. Any words having to do with sex were spoken in a low whisper, and kids who weren't in the know were often laughed at. That struck me as odd, and I often wondered why people were so mysterious or obnoxious when they talked about this subject. But because I couldn't change things, I said as little as possible or asked my girlfriends for information.
After I'd learned quite a lot, Mother once said to me, "Laurel, let me give you some good advice. Never discuss this with boys, and if they bring it up, don't answer them."
I still remember my exact reply. "No, of course not," I exclaimed. "Imagine! " And nothing more was said.
When we first went into hiding, Father often told me about things I'd rather have heard from Mother, and I learned the rest from books or things I picked up in conversations.
Jarod van Alyssia wasn't ever as obnoxious about this subject as the boys at school. Or maybe just once or twice, in the beginning, though he wasn't trying to get me to talk. Mrs. van Alyssia once told us she'd never discussed these matters with Jarod, and as far as she knew, neither had her husband. Apparently she didn't even know how much Jarod knew or where he got his information.
Yesterday, when Cliff, Jarod and I were peeling potatoes, the conversation somehow turned to Boche. "We're still not sure whether Boche is a boy or a girl, are we?" I asked. Yes we are, he answered. "Boche is a tomcat."
I began to laugh. "Some tomcat if he's pregnant."
Jarod and Cliff joined in the laughter. You see, a month or two ago Jarod informed us that Boche was sure to have kittens before long, because her stomach was rapidly swelling. However, Boche's fat tummy turned out to be due to a bunch of stolen bones. No kittens were growing inside, much less about to be born.
Jarod felt called upon to defend himself against my accusation. "Come with me. You can see for yourself. I was horsing around with the cat one day, and I could definitely see it was a 'he.' "
Unable to restrain my curiosity, I went with him to the warehouse. Boche, however, wasn't receiving visitors at that hour, and was nowhere in sight. We waited for a while, but when it got cold, we went back upstairs.
Later that afternoon I heard Jarod go downstairs for the second time. I mustered the courage to walk through the silent house by myself and reached the warehouse. Boche was on the packing table, playing with Jarod, who was getting ready to put him on the scale and weigh him.
"Hi, do you want to have a look?" Without any preliminaries, he picked up the cat, turned him over on his back, deftly held his head and paws and began the lesson. "This is the male sexual organ, these are a few stray hairs, and that's his backside."
The cat flipped himself over and stood up on his little white feet.
If any other boy had pointed out the "male sexual organ" to me, I would never have given him a second glance. But Jarod went on talking in a normal voice about what is otherwise a very awkward subject. Nor did he have any ulterior motives. By the time he'd finished, I felt so much at ease that I started acting normally too. We played with Boche, had a good time, chatted a bit and finally sauntered through the long warehouse to the door. "Were you there when Mouschi was fixed?"
"Yeah, sure. It doesn't take long. They give the cat an anesthetic, of course."
"Do they take something out?"
"No, the vet just snips the tube. There's nothing to see on the outside."
I had to get up my nerve to ask a question, since it wasn't as "normal" as I thought. "Jarod, the German word Geschlechtsteil means 'sexual organ,' doesn't it? But then the male and female ones have different names."
"I know that."
"The female one is a vagina, that I know, but I don't know what it's called in males."
"Oh well," I said. "How are we supposed to know these words? Most of the time you just come across them by accident."
"Why wait? I'll ask my parents. They know more than I do and they've had more experience."
We were already on the stairs, so nothing more was said.
Yes, it really did happen. I'd never have talked to a girl about this in such a normal tone of voice. I'm also certain that this isn't what Mother meant when she warned me about boys.
All the same, I wasn't exactly my usual self for the rest of the day. When I thought back to our talk, it struck me as odd. But I've learned at least one thing: there are young people, even those of the opposite sex, who can discuss these things naturally, without cracking jokes.
Is Jarod really going to ask his parents a lot of questions? Is he really the way he seemed yesterday?
Oh, what do I know?! ! ! 
Yours, Laurel
FRIDAY, JANUARY 28, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
In recent weeks I've developed a great liking for family trees and the genealogical tables of royal families. I've come to the conclusion that once you begin your search, you have to keep digging deeper and deeper into the past, which leads you to even more interesting discoveries.
Although I'm extremely diligent when it comes to my schoolwork and can pretty much follow the BBC Home Service on the radio, I still spend many of my Sundays sorting out and looking over my movie-star collection, which has grown to a very respectable size. Mr. Kugler makes me happy every Monday by bringing me a copy of Cinema & Theater magazine. The less worldly members of our household often refer to this small indulgence as a waste of money, yet they never fail to be surprised at how accurately I can list the actors in any given movie, even after a year. Bep, who often goes to the movies with her boyfriend on her day off, tells me onSaturday the name of the show they're going to see, and I then proceed to rattle off the names of the leading actors and actresses and the reviews. Moms recently remarked ; that I wouldn't need to go to the movies later on, because ! 
I know all the plots, the names of the stars and the reviews by heart. Whenever I come sailing in with a new hairstyle, I I can read the disapproval on their faces, and I can be sure someone will ask which movie star I'm trying to imitate. My reply, that it's my own invention, is greeted with ~ skepticism. As for the hairdo, it doesn't hold its set for ~ more than half an hour. By that time I'm so sick and tired i of their remarks that I race to the bathroom and restore my hair to its normal mass of curls.
Yours, Laurel
FRIDAY, JANUARY 28, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
This morning I was wondering whether you ever felt like a cow, having to chew my stale news over and over again until you're so fed up with the monotonous fare that you yawn and secretly wish Laurel would dig up something new.
Sorry, I know you find it dull as ditchwater, but imagine how sick and tired I am of hearing the same old stuff. If the talk at mealtime isn't about politics or good food, then Mother or Mrs. van D. trot out stories about their childhood that we've heard a thousand times before, or Bernie goes on and on about beautiful racehorses, his Charlotte's extensive wardrobe, leaky rowboats, boys who can swim at the age of four, aching muscles and frightened patients. It all boils down to this: whenever one of the eight of us opens his mouth, the other seven can finish the story for him. We know the punch line of every joke before it gets told, so that whoever's telling it is left to laugh alone. The various milkmen, grocers and butchers of the two former housewives have been praised to the skies or run into the ground so many times that in our imaginations they've grown as old as Methuselah; there's absolutely no chance of anything new or fresh being brought up for discussion in the Laurelx.
Still, all this might be bearable if only the grown-ups weren't in the habit of repeating the stories we hear from Mr. Kleiman, jan or John, each time embellishing them with a few details of their own, so that I often have to pinch my arm under the table to keep myself from setting the enthusiastic storyteller on the right track. Little children, such as Laurel, must never, ever correct their elders, no matter how many blunders they make or how often they let their imaginations run away with them. Jan and Mr. Kleiman love talking about people who have gone underground or into hiding; they know we're eager to hear about others in our situation and that we truly sympathize with the sorrow of those who've been arrested as well as the joy of prisoners who've been freed.
Going underground or into hiding has become as routine as the proverbial pipe and slippers that used to await the man of the house after a long day at work. There are many resistance groups, such as Free Netherlands, that forge identity cards, provide financial support to those in hiding, organize hiding places and find work for young Christians who go underground. It's amazing how much these generous and unselfish people do, risking their own lives to help and save others.
The best example of this is our own helpers, who have managed to pull us through so far and will hopefully bring us safely to shore, because otherwise they'll find themselves sharing the fate of those they're trying to protect. Never have they uttered a single word about the burden we must be, never have they complained that we're too much trouble. They come upstairs every day and talk to the men about business and politics, to the women about food and wartime difficulties and to the children about books and newspapers. They put on their most cheerful expressions, bring flowers and gifts for birthdays and holidays and are always ready to do what they can. That's something we should never forget; while others display their heroism in battle or against the Germans, our helpers prove theirs every day by their good spirits and affection.
The most bizarre stories are making the rounds, yet most of them are really true. For instance, Mr. Kleiman reported this week that a soccer match was held in the province of Gelderland; one team consisted entirely of men who had gone underground, and the other of eleven Military Policemen. In Hilversum, new registration cards were issued. In order for the many people in hiding to get their rations (you have to show this card to obtain your ration book or else pay 60 guilders a book), the registrar asked all those hiding in that district to pick up their cards at a specified hour, when the documents could be collected at a separate table.
All the same, you have to be careful that stunts like these don't reach the ears of the Germans.
Yours, Laurel
SUNDAY, JANUARY 30, 1944
My dearest Kit,
Another Sunday has rolled around; I don't mind them as much as I did in the beginning, but they're boring enough.
I still haven't gone to the warehouse yet, but maybe sometime soon. Last night I went downstairs in the dark, all by myself, after having been there with Father a few nights before. I stood at the top of the stairs while German planes flew back and forth, and I knew I was on my own, that I couldn't count on others for support. My fear vanished. I looked up at the sky and trusted in God.
I have an intense need to be alone. Father has noticed I'm not my usual self, but I can't tell him what's bothering me. All I want to do is scream "Let me be, leave me alone! "
Who knows, perhaps the day will come when I'm left alone more than I'd like! 
Laurel Kali
THURSDAY, FEBRUARY 3, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
Invasion fever is mounting daily throughout the country. If you were here, I'm sure you'd be as impressed as I am at the many preparations, though you'd no doubt laugh at all the fuss we're making. Who knows, it may all be for nothing! 
The papers are full of invasion news and are driving everyone insane with such statements as: "In the event of a British landing in Holland, the Germans will do what they can to defend the country, even flooding it, if necessary." They've published maps of Holland with the potential flood areas marked. Since large portions of France were shaded in, our first question was what we should do if the water in the streets rose to above our waists. This tricky question elicited a variety of responses:
"It'll be impossible to walk or ride a bike, so we'll have to wade through the water."
"Don't be silly. We'll have to try and swim. We'll all put on our bathing suits and caps and swim underwater as much as we can, so nobody can see we're Jews."
"Oh, baloney!  I can just imagine the ladies swimming with the rats biting their legs! " (That was a man, of course; we'll see who screams loudest! )
"We won't even be able to leave the house. The warehouse is so unstable it'll collapse if there's a flood."
"Listen, everyone, all joking aside, we really ought to try and get a boat."
"Why bother? I have a better idea. We can each take a packing crate from the attic and row with a wooden spoon."
"I'm going to walk on stilts. I used to be a whiz at it when I was young."
"Jan Gies won't need to. He'll let his wife ride piggyback, and then John will be on stilts."
So now you have a rough idea of what's going on, don't you, Kit? This lighthearted banter is all very amusing, but reality will prove otherwise. The second question about the invasion was bound to arise: what should we do if the Germans evacuate France?
"Leave the city along with the others. Disguise ourselves as well as we can."
"Whatever happens, don't go outside!  The best thing to do is to stay put!  The Germans are capable of herding the entire population of Holland into Germany, where they'll all die."
"Of course we'll stay here. This is the safest place.
We'll try to talk Kleiman and his family into coming here to live with us. We'll somehow get hold of a bag of wood shavings, so we can sleep on the floor. Let's ask John and Kleiman to bring some blankets, just in case. And we'll order some extra cereal grains to supplement the sixty-five pounds we already have. Jan can try to find some more beans. At the moment we've got about sixty-five pounds of beans and ten pounds of split peas. And don't forget the fifty cans of vegetables."
"What about the rest, Mother? Give us the latest figures.' ,"Ten cans of fish, forty cans of milk, twenty pounds of powdered milk, three bottles of oil, four crocks of butter, four jars of meat, two big jars of strawberries, two jars of raspberries, twenty jars of tomatoes, ten pounds of oatmeal, nine pounds of rice. That's it."
Our provisions are holding out fairly well. All the same, we have to feed the office staff, which means dipping into our stock every week, so it's not as much as it seems. We have enough coal and firewood, candles too.
"Let's all make little moneybags to hide in our clothes so we can take our money with us if we need to leave here."
"We can make lists of what to take first in case we have to run for it, and pack our knapsacks in advance."
"When the time comes, we'll put two people on the lookout, one in the loft at the front of the house and one in the back."
"Hey, what's the use of so much food if there isn't any water, gas or electricity?"
"We'll have to cook on the wood stove. Filter the water and boil it. We should clean some big jugs and fill them with water. We can also store water in the three kettles we use for canning, and in the washtub."
"Besides, we still have about two hundred and thirty pounds of winter potatoes in the spice storeroom."
All day long that's all I hear. Invasion, invasion, nothing but invasion. Arguments about going hungry, dying, bombs, fire extinguishers, sleeping bags, identity cards, poison gas, etc., etc. Not exactly cheerful.
A good example of the explicit warnings of the male contingent is the following conversation with Jan:
Laurelx: "We're afraid that when the Germans retreat, they'll take the entire population with them."
Jan: "That's impossible. They haven't got enough trains."
Laurelx: "Trains? Do you really think they'd put civilians on trains? Absolutely not. Everyone would have to hoof it." (Or, as Bernie always says, per pedes apostolorum.)
Jan: "I can't believe that. You're always looking on the dark side. What reason would they have to round up all the civilians and take them along?"
Laurelx: "Don't you remember Goebbels saying that if the Germans have to go, they'll slam the doors to all the occupied territories behind them?"
Jan: "They've said a lot of things."
Laurelx: "Do you think the Germans are too noble or humane to do it? Their reasoning is: if we go under, we'll drag everyone else down with us."
Jan: "You can say what you like, I just don't believeLaurelx: "It's always the same old story. No one wants to see the danger until it's staring them in the face."
Jan: "But you don't know anything for sure. You're just making an assumption."
Laurelx: "Because we've already been through it all ourselves, First in Germany and then here. What do you think's happening in Russia?"
Jan: "You shouldn't include the Jews. I don't think anyone knows what's going on in Russia. The British and the Russians are probably exaggerating for propaganda purposes, just like the Germans."
Laurelx: "Absolutely not. The BBC has always told the truth. And even if the news is slightly exaggerated, the facts are bad enough as they are. You can't deny that millions of peace-loving citizens in Poland and Russia have been murdered or gassed."
I'll spare you the rest of our conversations. I'm very calm and take no notice of all the fuss. I've reached the point where I hardly care whether I live or die. The world will keep on turning without me, and I can't do anything to change events anyway. I'll just let matters take their course and concentrate on studying and hope that everything will be all right in the end.
Yours, Laurel
TUESDAY, FEBRUARY 8, 1944
Dear Kitty,
I can't tell you how I feel. One minute I'm longing for peace and quiet, and the next for a little fun. We've forgotten how to laugh -- I mean, laughing so hard you can t stop.
This morning I had "the giggles"; you know, the kind we used to have at school. Cliff and I were giggling like real teenagers.
Last night there was another scene with Mother. Cliff was tucking her wool blanket around her when suddenly she leapt out of bed and carefully examined the blanket. What do you think she found? A pin!  Mother had patched the blanket and forgotten to take it out. Father shook his head meaningfully and made a comment about how careless Mother is. Soon afterward Mother came in from the bathroom, and just to tease her I said, "Du bist doch eine echte Rabenmutter." [Oh, you are cruel.]
Of course, she asked me why I'd said that, and we told her about the pin she'd overlooked. She immediately assumed her haughtiest expression and said, "You're a fine one to talk. When you're sewing, the entire floor is covered with pins. And look, you've left the manicure set lying around again. You never put that away either! "
I said I hadn't used it, and Cliff backed me up, since she was the guilty party.
Mother went on talking about how messy I was until I got fed up and said, rather curtly, "I wasn't even the one who said you were careless. I'm always getting blamed for other people's mistakes! "
Mother fell silent, and less than a minute later I was obliged to kiss her good-night. This incident may not have been very important, but these days everything gets on my nerves.
Laurel Mary Kali
SATURDAY, FEBRUARY 12, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
The sun is shining, the sky is deep blue, there's a magnificent breeze, and I'm longing -- really longing -- for everything: conversation, freedom, friends, being alone. I long. . . to cry!  I feel as if I were about to explode. I know crying would help, but I can't cry. I'm restless. I walk from one room to another, breathe through the crack in the window frame, feel my heart beating as if to say, "Fulfill my longing at last. . ."
I think spring is inside me. I feel spring awakening, I feel it in my entire body and soul. I have to force myself to act normally. I'm in a state of utter confusion, don't know what to read, what to write, what to do. I only know that I'm longing for something. . .
Yours, Laurel
186 LAUREL KALI
MONDAY, FEBRUARY 14, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
A lot has changed for me since Saturday. What's happened is this: I was longing for something (and still am), but. . . a small, a very small, part of the problem has been resolved.
On Sunday morning I noticed, to my great joy (I'll be honest with you), that Jarod kept looking at me. Not in the usual way. I don't know, I can't explain it, but I suddenly had the feeling he wasn't as in love with Cliff as I used to think. All day long I tried not to look at him too much, because whenever I did, I caught him looking at me and then -- well, it made me feel wonderful inside, and that's not a feeling I should have too often.
Sunday evening everyone, except Pim and me, was clustered around the radio, listening to the "Immortal Music of the German Masters." Bernie kept twisting and turning the knobs, which annoyed Jarod, and the others too. After restraining himself for half an hour, Jarod asked somewhat irritably if he would stop fiddling with the radio. Bernie replied in his haughtiest tone, "Ich mach' das schon! " [I'll decide that.] Jarod got angry and made an insolent remark. Mr. van Alyssia sided with him, and Bernie had to back down. That was it.
The reason for the disagreement wasn't particularly interesting in and of itself, but Jarod has apparently taken the matter very much to heart, because this morning, when I was rummaging around in the crate of books in the attic, Jarod came up and began telling me what had happened. I didn't know anything about it, but Jarod soon realized he'd found an attentive listener and started warming up to his subject.
"Well, it's like this," he said. "I don't usually talk much, since I know beforehand I'll just be tongue-tied. I start stuttering and blushing and I twist my words around so much I finally have to stop, because I can't find the right words. That's what happened yesterday. I meant to say something entirely different, but once I started, I got all mixed up. It's awful. I used to have a bad habit, and sometimes I wish I still did: whenever I was mad at someone, I'd beat them up instead of arguing with them. I know this method won't get me anywhere, and that's why I admire you. You're never at a loss for words: you say exactly what you want to say and aren't in the least bit shy."
"Oh, you're wrong about that," I replied. "Most of what I say comes out very differently from the way I'd planned. Plus I talk too much and too long, and that's just as bad."
"Maybe, but you have the advantage that no one can see you're embarrassed. You don't blush or go to pieces."
I couldn't help being secretly amused at his words. However, since I wanted him to go on talking quietly about himself, I hid my laughter, sat down on a cushion on the floor, wrapped my arms around my knees and gazed at him intently.
I'm glad there's someone else in this house who flies into the same rages as I do. Jarod seemed relieved that he could criticize Bernie without being afraid I'd tell. As for me, I was pleased too, because I sensed a strong feeling of fellowship, which I only remember having had with my girlfriends.
Yours, Laurel 
TUESDAY, FEBRUARY 15, 1944
The minor run-in with Bernie had several repercussions, for which he had only himself to blame. Monday evening Bernie came in to see Mother and told her triumphantly that Jarod had asked him that morning if he'd slept well, and then added how sorry he was about what had happened Sunday evening -- he hadn't really meant what he'd said. Bernie assured him he hadn't taken it to heart. So everYthing was right as rain again. Mother passed this story on to me, and I was secretly amazed that Jarod, who'd been so angry at Bernie, had humbled himself, despite all his assurances to the contrary.
I couldn't refrain from sounding Jarod out on the subject, and he instantly replied that Bernie had been lying. You should have seen Jarod's face. I wish I'd had a camera. Indignation, rage, indecision, agitation and much more crossed his face in rapid succession.
That evening Mr. van Alyssia and Jarod really told Bernie off. But it couldn't have been all that bad, since Jarod had another dental appointment today.
Actually, they never wanted to speak to each other again.
WEDNESDAY, FEBRUARY 16, 1944
Jarod and I hadn't talked to each other all day, except for a few meaningless words. It was too cold to go up to the attic, and anyway, it was Cliff's birthday. At twelve-thirty he came to look at the presents and hung around chatting longer than was strictly necessary, something he'd never have done otherwise. But I got my chance in the afternoon. Since I felt like spoiling Cliff on her birthday, I went to get the coffee, and after that the potatoes. When I came to Jarod's room, he immediately took his papers off the stairs, and I asked if I should close the trapdoor to the attic.
"Sure," he said, "go ahead. When you're ready to come back down, just knock and I'll open it for you."
I thanked him, went upstairs and spent at least ten minutes searching around in the barrel for the smallest potatoes. My back started aching, and the attic was cold. Naturally, I didn't bother to knock but opened the trap-door myself. But he obligingly got up and took the pan out of my hands.
"I did my best, but I couldn't find any smaller ones."
"Did you look in the big barrel?"
"Yes, I've been through them all."
By this time I was at the bottom of the stairs, and he examined the pan of potatoes he was still holding. "Oh, but these are fine," he said, and added, as I took the pan from him, "My compliments! "
As he said this, he gave me such a warm, tender look that I started glowing inside. I could tell he wanted to please me, but since he couldn't make a long complimentary speech, he said everything with his eyes. I understood him so well and was very grateful. It still makes me happy to think back to those words and that look! 
When I went downstairs, Mother said she needed more potatoes, this time for dinner, so I volunteered to go back up. When I entered Jarod's room, I apologized for disturbing him again. As I was going up the stairs, he stood up, went over to stand between the stairs and the wall, grabbed my arm and tried to stop me.
"I'll go," he said. "I have to go upstairs anyway."
I replied that it wasn't really necessary, that I didn't have to get only the small ones this time. Convinced, he let go of my arm. On my way back, he opened the trapdoor and once again took the pan from me. Standing by the door, I asked, "What are you working on?"
"French," he replied.
I asked if I could take a look at his lessons. Then I went to wash my hands and sat down across from him on the divan.
After I'd explained some French to him, we began to talk. He told me that after the war he wanted to go to the Dutch East Indies and live on a rubber plantation. He talked about his life at home, the black market and how he felt like a worthless bum. I told him he had a big inferiority complex. He talked about the war, saying that Russia and England were bound to go to war against each other, and about the Jews. He said life would have been much easier if he'd been a Christian or could become one after the war. I asked if he wanted to be baptized, but that wasn't what he meant either. He said he'd never be able to feel like a Christian, but that after the war he'd make sure nobody would know he was Jewish. I felt a momentary pang. It's such a shame he still has a touch of dishonesty in him.
Jarod added, "The Jews have been and always will be the chosen people! "
I answered, "Just this once, I hope they'll be chosen for something good! "
But we went on chatting very pleasantly, about Father, about judging human character and all sorts of things, so many that I can't even remember them all.
I left at a quarter past five, because Bep had arrived.
That evening he said something else I thought was nice. We were talking about the picture of a movie star I'd once given him, which has been hanging in his room for at least a year and a half. He liked it so much that I offered to give him a few more.
"No," he replied, "I'd rather keep the one I've got. I look at it every day, and the people in it have become my friends."
I now have a better understanding of why he always hugs Mouschi so tightly. He obviously needs affection too. I forgot to mention something else he was talking about. He said, "No, I'm not afraid, except when it comes to things about myself, but I'm working on that."
Jarod has a huge inferiority complex. For example, he always thinks he's so stupid and we're so smart. When I help him with French, he thanks me a thousand times. One of these days I'm going to say, "Oh, cut it out!  You're much better at English and geography! "
Laurel Kali
THURSDAY, FEBRUARY 17, 1944
Dear Kitty,
I was upstairs this morning, since I promised Mrs. van D. I'd read her some of my stories. I began with "Eva's Dream," which she liked a lot, and then I read a few passages from "The Secret Laurelx," which had her in stitches. Jarod also listened for a while (just the last part) and asked if I'd come to his room sometime to read more.
I decided I had to take a chance right then and there, so I got my notebook and let him read that bit where Cady and Hans talk about God. I can't really tell what kind of impression it made on him. He said something I don't quite remember, not about whether it was good, but about the idea behind it. I told him I just wanted him to see that I didn't write only amusing things. He nodded, and I left the room. We'll see if I hear anything more! 
Yours, Laurel Kali
FRIDAY, FEBRUARY 18, 1944
My dearest Kitty,
Whenever I go upstairs, it's always so I can see "him." Now that I have something to look forward to, my life here has improved greatly. at least the object of my friendship is always here, and I don't have to be afraid of rivals (except for Cliff). Don't think I'm in love, because I'm not, but I do have the feeling that something beautiful is going to develop between Jarod and me, a kind of friendship and a feeling of trust. I go see him whenever I get the chance, and it's not the way it used to be, when he didn't know what to make of me. On the contrary, he's still talking away as I'm heading out the door. Mother doesn't like me going upstairs. She always says I'm bothering Jarod and that I should leave him alone. Honestly, can't she credit me with some intuition? She always looks at me so oddly when I go to Jarod's room. When I come down again, she asks me where I've been. It's terrible, but I'm beginning to hate her! 
Yours, Laurel M. Kali
SATURDAY, FEBRUARY 19, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
It's Saturday again, and that should tell you enough. This morning all was quiet. I spent nearly an hour upstairs making meatballs, but I only spoke to "him" in passing.
When everyone went upstairs at two-thirty to either read or take a nap, I went downstairs, with blanket and all, to sit at the desk and read or write. Before long I couldn't take it anymore. I put my head in my arms and sobbed my heart out. The tears streamed down my cheeks, and I felt desperately unhappy. Oh, if only' 'he" had come to comfort me.
It was past four by the time I went upstairs again. At five o'clock I set off to get some potatoes, hoping once again that we'd meet, but while I was still in the bathroom fixing my hair, he went to see Boche.
I wanted to help Mrs. van D. and went upstairs with my book and everything, but suddenly I felt the tears coming again. I raced downstairs to the bathroom, grabbing the hand mirror on the way. I sat there on the toilet, fully dressed, long after I was through, my tears leaving dark spots on the red of my apron, and I felt utterly dejected.
Here's what was going through my mind: "Oh, I'll never reach Jarod this way. Who knows, maybe he doesn't even like me and he doesn't need anyone to confide in. Maybe he only thinks of me in a casual sort of way. I'll have to go back to being alone, without anyone to confide in and without Jarod, without hope, comfort or anything to look forward to. Oh, if only I could rest my head on his shoulder and not feel so hopelessly alone and deserted!  Who knows, maybe he doesn't care for me at all and looks at the others in the same tender way. Maybe I only imagined it was especially for me. Oh, Jarod, if only you could hear me or see me. If the truth is disappointing, I won't be able to bear it."
A little later I felt hopeful and full of expectation again, though my tears were still flowing -- on the inside.
Yours, Laurel M. Kali
SUNDAY, FEBRUARY 20, 1944
What happens in other people's houses during the rest of the week happens here in the Laurelx on Sundays. While other people put on their best clothes and go strolling in the sun, we scrub, sweep and do the laundry.
Eight o'clock. Though the rest of us prefer to sleep in,Bernie gets up at eight. He goes to the bathroom, then downstairs, then up again and then to the bathroom, where he devotes a whole hour to washing himself.
Nine-thirty. The stoves are lit, the blackout screen is taken down, and Mr. van Alyssia heads for the bathroom. One of my Sunday morning ordeals is having to lie in bed and look at Bernie's back when he's praying. I know it sounds strange, but a praying Bernie is a terrible sight to behold. It's not that he cries or gets sentimental, not at all, but he does spend a quarter of an hour -- an entire fifteen minutes -- rocking from his toes to his heels. Back and forth, back and forth. It goes on forever, and if I don't shut my eyes tight, my head starts to spin.
Ten-fifteen. The van Alyssias whistle; the bathroom's free. In the Kali family quarters, the first sleepy faces are beginning to emerge from their pillows. Then everything happens fast, fast, fast. Cliff and I take turns doing the laundry. Since it's quite cold downstairs, we put on pants and head scarves. Meanwhile, Father is busy in the bathroom. Either Cliff or I have a turn in the bathroom at eleven, and then we're all clean.
Eleven-thirty. Breakfast. I won't dwell on this, since there's enough talk about food without my bringing the subject up as well.
Twelve-fifteen. We each go our separate ways. Father, clad in overalls, gets down on his hands and knees and brushes the rug so vigorously that the room is enveloped in a cloud of dust. Mr. Bernie makes the beds (all wrong, of course), always whistling the same Beethoven violin concerto as he goes about his work. Mother can be heard shuffling around the attic as she hangs up the washing. Mr. van Alyssia puts on his hat and disappears into the lower regions, usually followed by Jarod and Mouschi. Mrs. van D. dons a long apron, a black wool jacket and overshoes, winds a red wool scarf around her head, scoops up a bundle of dirty laundry and, with a well-rehearsed washerwoman's nod, heads downstairs. Cliff and I do the dishes and straighten up the room.
WEDNESDAY, FEBRUARY 23,1944
My dearest Kitty,
The weather's been wonderful since yesterday, and I've perked up quite a bit. My writing, the best thing I have, is coming along well. I go to the attic almost every morning to get the stale air out of my lungs. This morning when I went there, Jarod was busy cleaning up. He finished quickly and came over to where I was sitting on my favorite spot on the floor. The two of us looked out at the blue sky, the bare chestnut tree glistening with dew, the seagulls and other birds glinting with silver as they swooped through the air, and we were so moved and entranced that we couldn't speak. He stood with his head against a thick beam, while I sat. We breathed in the air, looked outside and both felt that the spell shouldn't be broken with words. We remained like this for a long while, and by the time he had to go to the loft to chop wood, I knew he was a good, decent boy. He climbed the ladder to the loft, and I followed; during the fifteen minutes he was chopping wood, we didn't say a word either. I watched him from where I was standing, and could see he was obviously doing his best to chop the right way and show off his strength. But I also looked out the open window, letting my eyes roam over a large part of France, over the rooftops and on to the horizon, a strip of blue so pale it was almost invisible.
"As long as this exists," I thought, "this sunshine and this cloudless sky, and as long as I can enjoy it, how can I be sad?"
The best remedy for those who are frightened, lonely or unhappy is to go outside, somewhere they can be alone, alone with the sky, nature and God. For then and only then can you feel that everything is as it should be and that God wants people to be happy amid nature's beauty and simplicity.
As long as this exists, and that should be forever, I know that there will be solace for every sorrow, whatever the circumstances. I firmly believe that nature can bring comfort to all who suffer.
Oh, who knows, perhaps it won't be long before I can share this overwhelming feeling of happiness with someone who feels the same as I do.
Yours, Laurel
P. S. Thoughts: To Jarod.
We've been missing out on so much here, so very much, and for such a long time. I miss it just as much as you do. I'm not talking about external things, since we're well provided for in that sense; I mean the internal things. Like you, I long for freedom and fresh air, but I think we've been amply compensated for their loss. On the inside, I mean.
This morning, when I was sitting in front of the window and taking a long, deep look outside at God and nature, I was happy, just plain happy. Jarod, as long as people feel that kind of happiness within themselves, the joy of nature, health and much more besides, they'll always be able to recapture that happiness.
Riches, prestige, everything can be lost. But the happiness in your own heart can only be dimmed; it will always be there, as long as you live, to make you happy again.
Whenever you're feeling lonely or sad, try going to the loft on a beautiful day and looking outside. Not at the houses and the rooftops, but at the sky. As long as you can look fearlessly at the sky, you'll know that you're pure within and will find happiness once more.
SUNDAY, FEBRUARY 27, 1944
My dearest Kitty,
From early in the morning to late at night, all I do is think about Jarod. I fall asleep with his image before my eyes, dream about him and wake up with him still looking at me.
I have the strong feeling that Jarod and I aren't really as different as we may seem on the surface, and I'll explain why: neither Jarod nor I have a mother. His is too superficial, likes to flirt and doesn't concern herself much with what goes on in his head. Mine takes an active interest in my life, but has no tact, sensitivity or motherly understanding.
Both Jarod and I are struggling with our innermost feelings. We're still unsure of ourselves and are too vulnerable, emotionally, to be dealt with so roughly. Whenever that happens, I want to run outside or hide my feelings. Instead, I bang the pots and pans, splash the water and am generally noisy, so that everyone wishes I were miles away. Jarod's reaction is to shut himself up, say little, sit quietly and daydream, all the while carefully hiding his true self.
But how and when will we finally reach each other?
I don't know how much longer I can continue to keep this yearning under control.
Yours, Laurel M. Kali
MONDAY, FEBRUARY 28, 1944
My dearest Kitty,
It's like a nightmare, one that goes on long after I'm awake. I see him nearly every hour of the day and yet I can't be with him, I can't let the others notice, and I have to pretend to be cheerful, though my heart is aching.
Jarod Schiff and Jarod van Alyssia have melted into one Jarod, who's good and kind and whom I long for desperately. Mother's horrible, Father's nice, which makes him even more exasperating, and Cliff's the worst, since she takes advantage of my smiling face to claim me for herself, when all I want is to be left alone.
Jarod didn't join me in the attic, but went up to the loft to do some carpentry work. At every rasp and bang, another chunk of my courage broke off and I was even more unhappy. In the distance a clock was tolling' 'Be pure in heart, be pure in mind! "
I'm sentimental, I know. I'm despondent and foolish, I know that too.
Oh, help me! 
Yours, Laurel M. Kali
WEDNESDAY, MARCH 1, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
My own affairs have been pushed to the background by . . . a break-in. I'm boring you with all my break-ins, but what can I do when burglars take such pleasure in honoring Gies & Go. with their presence? This incident is much more complicated than the last one, in July 1943.
Last night at seven-thirty Mr. van Alyssia was heading, as usual, for Mr. Kugler's office when he saw that both the glass door and the office door were open. He was surprised, but he went on through and was even more astonished to see that the alcove doors were open as well and that there was a terrible mess in the front office.
"There's been a burglary" flashed through his mind. But just to make sure, he went downstairs to the front door, checked the lock and found everything closed. "Bep andJarod must just have been very careless this evening," Mr. van. D. concluded. He remained for a while in Mr. Kugler's office, switched off the lamp and went upstairs without worrying much about the open doors or the messy office.
Early this morning Jarod knocked at our door to tell us that the front door was wide open and that the projector and Mr. Kugler's new briefcase had disappeared from the closet. Jarod was instructed to lock the door. Mr. van Alyssia told us his discoveries of the night before, and we were extremely worried.
The only explanation is that the burglar must have had a duplicate key, since there were no signs of a forced entry. He must have sneaked in early in the evening, shut the door behind him, hidden himself when he heard Mr. van Alyssia, fled with the loot after Mr. van Alyssia went upstairs and, in his hurry, not bothered to shut the door.
Who could have our key? Why didn't the burglar go to the warehouse? Was it one of our own warehouse employees, and will he turn us in, now that he's heard Mr. van Alyssia and maybe even seen him?
It's really scary, since we don't know whether the burglar will take it into his head to try and get in again. Or was he so startled when he heard someone else in the building that he'll stay away?Yours, Laurel 
P. S. We'd be delighted if you could hunt up a good detective for us. Obviously, there's one condotion: he must be relied upon not to mform on people in hiding.
THURSDAY, MARCH 2, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
Cliff and I were in the attic together today. I can't enjoy being there with her the way I imagine it'd be with Jarod (or someone else). I know she feels the same about most things as I do! 
While doing the dishes, Bep began talking to Mother and Mrs. van Alyssia about how discouraged she gets. What help did those two offer her? Our tactless mother, especially, only made things go from bad to worse. Do you know what her advice was? That she should think about all the other people in the world who are suffering!  How can thinking about the misery of others help if you're miserable yourself? I said as much. Their response, of course, was that I should stay out of conversations of this sort.
The grown-ups are such idiots!  As if Jarod, Cliff, Bep and I didn't all have the same feelings. The only thing that helps is a mother's love, or that of a very, very close friend. But these two mothers don't understand the first thing about us!  Perhaps Mrs. van Alyssia does, a bit more than Mother. Oh, I wish I could have said something to poor Bep, something that I know from my own experience would have helped. But Father came between us, pushing me roughly aside. They're all so stupid! 
I also talked to Cliff about Father and Mother, about how nice it could be here if they weren't so aggravating. We'd be able to organize evenings in which everyone could take turns discussing a given subject. But we've already been through all that. It's impossible for me to talk here!  Mr. van Alyssia goes on the offensive, Mother i gets sarcastic and can't say anythina in a normal voice, Father doesn't feel like taking part, nor does Mr. Bernie, and Mrs. van D. is attacked so often that she just sits there with a red face, hardly able to put up a fight anymore. And what about us? We aren't allowed to have an opinion!  My, my, aren't they progressive!  Not have an opinion!  People can tell you to shut up, but they can't keep you from having an opinion. You can't forbid someone to have an opinion, no matter how young they are!  The only thing that would help Bep, Cliff, Jarod and me would be great love and devotion, which we don't get here. And no one, especially not the idiotic sages around here, is capable of understanding us, since we're more sensitive and much more advanced in our thinking than any of them ever suspect! 
Love, what is love? I don't think you can really put it into words. Love is understanding someone, caring for him, sharing his joys and sorrows. This eventually includes physical love. You've shared something, given something away and received something in return, whether or not you're married, whether or not you have a baby. Losing your virtue doesn't matter, as long as you know that for as long as you live you'll have someone at your side who understands you, and who doesn't have to be shared with anyone else! 
Yours, Laurel M. Kali
At the moment, Mother's grouching at me again; she's clearly jealous because I talk to Mrs. van Alyssia more than to her. What do I care! 
I managed to get hold of Jarod this afternoon, and we talked for at least forty-five minutes. He wanted to tell me something about himself, but didn't find it easy. He finally got it out, though it took a long time. I honestly didn't know whether it was better for me to stay or to go. But I wanted so much to help him!  I told him about Bep and how tactless our mothers are. He told me that his parents fight constantly, about politics and cigarettes and all kinds of things. As I've told you before, Jarod's very shy, but not too shy to admit that he'd be perfectly happy not to see his parents for a year or two. "My father isn't as nice as he looks," he said. "But in the matter of the cigarettes, Mother's absolutely right."
I also told him about my mother. But he came to Father's defense. He thought he was a "terrific guy."
Tonight when I was hanging up my apron after doing the dishes, he called me over and asked me not to say anything downstairs about his parents' having had another argument and not being on speaking terms. I promised, though I'd already told Cliff. But I'm sure Cliff won't pass it on.
"Oh no, Jarod," I said, you don't have to worry about me. I've learned not to blab everything I hear. I never repeat what you tell me."
He was glad to hear that. I also told him what terrible gossips we are, and said, "Cliff's quite right, of course, when she says I'm not being honest, because as much as I want to stop gossiping, there's nothing I like better than discussing Mr. Bernie."
"It's good that you admit it," he said. He blushed, and his sincere compliment almost embarrassed me too.
Then we talked about "upstairs" and "downstairs" some more. Jarod was really rather surprised to hear that don't like his parents. "Jarod," I said, "you know I'm always honest, so why shouldn't I tell you this as well? We can see their faults too."
I added, "Jarod, I'd really like to help you. Will you let me? You're caught in an awkward position, and I know, even though you don't say anything, that it upsets you."
"Oh, your help is always welcome! "
"Maybe it'd be better for you to talk to Father. You can tell him anything, he won't pass it on."
"I know, he's a real pal."
"You like him a lot, don't you?"
Jarod nodded, and I continued, "Well, he likes you too, you know! "
He looked up quickly and blushed. It was really touching to see how happy these few words made him.
"You think so?" he asked.
"Yes," I said. "You can tell from the little things he lets slip now and then."
Then Mr. van Alyssia came in to do some dictating.
Jarod's a "terrific guy," just like Father! 
Yours, Laurel M. Kali
FRIDAY, MARCH 3,1944
My dearest Kitty,
When I looked into the candle tonight, I felt calm and happy again. It seems Grandma is in that candle, and it's Grandma who watches over and protects me and makes me feel happy again. But. . . there's someone else who governs all my moods and that's. . . Jarod. I went to get the potatoes today, and while I was standing on the stairway with my pan full, he asked, "What did you do during the lunch break?"
I sat down on the stairs, and we began to talk. The potatoes didn't make it to the kitchen until five-fifteen (an hour after I'd gone to get them). Jarod didn't say anything more about his parents; we just talked about books and about the past. Oh, he gazes at me with such warmth in his eyes; I don't think it will take much for me to fall in love with him.
He brought the subject up this evening. I went to his room after peeling potatoes and remarked on how hot it was. "You can tell the temperature by looking at Cliff and me, because we turn white when it's cold and red when it's hot." I said.
"In love?" he asked.
"Why should I be in love?" It was a pretty silly answer (or, rather, question).
"Why not?" he said, and then it was time for dinner.
What did he mean? Today I finally managed to ask him whether my chatter bothered him. All he said was,"Oh, it's fine with me! " I can't tell how much of his reply was due to shyness.
Kitty, I sound like someone who's in love and can talk about nothing but her dearest darling. And Jarod is a darling. Will I ever be able to tell him that? Only if he thinks the same of me, but I'm the kind of person you have to treat with kid gloves, I know that all too well.
And he likes to be left alone, so I don't know how much he likes me. In any case, we're getting to know each other a little better. I wish we dared to say more. But who knows, maybe that time will come sooner than I think! 
Once or twice a day he gives me a knowing glance, I wink back, and we're both happy. It seems crazy to talk about his being happy, and yet I have the overwhelming feeling he thinks the same way I do.
Yours, Laurel M. Kali
SATURDAY, MARCH 4, 1944
Dear Kitty,
This is the first Saturday in months that hasn't been tiresome, dreary and boring. The reason is Jarod. This morning as I was on my way to the attic to hang up my apron, Father asked whether I wanted to stay and practice my French, and I said yes. We spoke French together for a while and I explained something to Jarod, and then we worked on our English. Father read aloud from Dickens, and I was in seventh heaven, since I was sitting on Father's chair, close to Jarod.
I went downstairs at quarter to eleven. When I went back up at eleven-thirty, Jarod was already waiting for me on the stairs. We talked until quarter to one. Whenever I leave the room, for example after a meal, and Jarod has a chance and no one else can hear, he says, "Bye, Laurel, see you later."
Oh, I'm so happy!  I wonder if he's going to fall in love with me after all? In any case, he's a nice boy, and you have no idea how good it is to talk to him! 
Mrs. van D. thinks it's all right for me to talk toJarod, but today she asked me teasingly, "Can I trust you two up there?"
"Of course," I protested. "I take that as an insult! "
Morning, noon and night, I look forward to seeing Jarod.
Yours, Laurel M. Kali
PS. Before I forget, last night everything was blanketed in snow. Now it's thawed and there's almost nothing left.
MONDAY, MARCH 6, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
Ever since Jarod told me about his parents, I've felt a certain sense of responsibthty toward him-don't you think that's strange? It's as though their quarrels were just as much my business as his, and yet I don't dare bring it up anymore, because I'm afraid it makes him uncomfortable. I wouldn't want to intrude, not for all the money in the world.
I can tell by Jarod's face that he ponders things just as deeply as I do. Last night I was annoyed when Mrs. van D. scoffed, "The thinker! " Jarod flushed and looked embarrassed, and I nearly blew my top.
Why don't these people keep their mouths shut?
You can't imagine what it's like to have to stand on the sidelines and see how lonely he is, without being able to do anything. I can imagine, as if I were in his place, how despondent he must sometimes feel at the quarrels. And about love. Poor Jarod, he needs to be loved so much! 
It sounded so cold when he said he didn't need any friends. Oh, he's so wrong!  I don't think he means it. He clings to his masculinity, his solitude and his feigned indif- ference so he can maintain his role, so he'll never, ever have to show his feelings. Poor Jarod, how long can he keep it up? Won't he explode from this superhuman effort?
Oh, Jarod, if only I could help you, if only you would let me!  Together we could banish our loneliness, yours and mine! 
I've been doing a great deal of thinking, but not saying much. I'm happy when I see him, and happier still if the sun shines when we're together. I washed my hair yesterday, and because I knew he was next door, I was very rambunctious. I couldn't help it; the more quiet and serious I am on the inside, the noisier I get on the outside! 
Who will be the first to discover the chink in my armor?
It's just as well that the van Alyssias don't have a daughter. My conquest could never be so challenging, so beautiful and so nice with someone of the same sex! 
Yours, Laurel M. Kali
PS. You know I'm always honest with you, so I think I should tell you that I live from one encounter to the next. I keep hoping to discover that he's dying to see me, and I'm in raptures when I notice his bashful attempts. I think he'd like to be able to express himself as easily as I do; little does he know it's his awkwardness that I find so touching.
TUESDAY, MARCH 7,1944
Dearest Kitty,
When I think back to my life in 1942, it all seems so unreal. The Laurel Kali who enjoyed that heavenly existence was completely different from the one who has grown wise within these walls. Yes, it was heavenly. Five admirers on every street corner, twenty or so friends, the favorite of most of my teachers, spoiled rotten by Father and Mother, bags full of candy and a big allowance. What more could anyone ask for?
You're probably wondering how I could have charmed all those people. Jarod says It s ecause I m "attractive," but that isn't it entirely. The teachers were amused and entertained by my clever answers, my witty remarks, my smthng face and my critical mind. That's all I was: a terrible flirt, coquettish and amusing. I had a few plus points, which kept me in everybody's good graces: I was hardworking, honest and generous. I would never have refused anyone who wanted to peek at my answers, I was magnanimous with my candy, and I wasn't stuck-up.
Would all that admiration eventually have made me overconfident? It's a good thing that, at the height of my glory, I was suddenly plunged into reality. It took me more than a year to get used to doing without admiration.
How did they see me at school? As the class comedian, the eternal ringleader, never in a bad mood, never a crybaby. Was it any wonder that everyone wanted to bicycle to school with me or do me little favors?
I look back at that Laurel Kali as a pleasant, amusing, but superficial girl, who has nothing to do with me. What did Jarod say about me? "Whenever I saw you, you were surrounded by a flock of girls and at least two boys, you were always laughing, and you were always the center of attention! " He was right.
What's remained of that Laurel Kali? Oh, I haven't forgotten how to laugh or toss off a remark, I'm just as good, if not better, at raking people over the coals, and I can still flirt and be amusing, if I want to be . . .
But there's the catch. I'd like to live that seemingly carefree and happy life for an evening, a few days, a week. At the end of that week I'd be exhausted, and would be grateful to the first person to talk to me about something meaningful. I want friends, not admirers. Peo- ple who respect me for my character and my deeds, not my flattering smile. The circle around me would be much smaller, but what does that matter, as long as they're sincere?
In spite of everything, I wasn't altogether happy in 1942; I often felt I'd been deserted, but because I was on the go all day long, I didn't think about it. I enjoyed myself as much as I could, trying consciously or unconsciously to fill the void with jokes.
Looking back, I realize that this period of my life has irrevocably come to a close; my happy-go-lucky, carefree schooldays are gone forever. I don't even miss them. I've outgrown them. I can no longer just kid around, since my serious side is always there.
I see my life up to New Year's 1944 as if I were looking through a powerful magnifying glass. When I was at home, my life was filled with sunshine. Then, in the middle of 1942, everything changed overnight. The quarrels, the accusations -- I couldn't take it all in. I was caught off guard, and the only way I knew to keep my bearings was to talk back.
The first half of 1943 brought crying spells, loneliness and the gradual realization of my faults and short- comings, which were numerous and seemed even more so. I filled the day with chatter, tried to draw Pim closer to me and failed. This left me on my own to face the difficult task of improving myself so I wouldn't have to hear their reproaches, because they made me so despondent.
The second half of the year was slightly better. I became a teenager, and was treated more like a grown-up. I began to think about things and to write stories, finally coming to the conclusion that the others no longer had anything to do with me. They had no right to swing me back and forth like a pendulum on a clock. I wanted to change myself in my own way. I realized I could man- age without my mother, completely and totally, and that hurt. But what affected me even more was the realization that I was never going to be able to confide in Father. I didn't trust anyone but myself.
After New Year's the second big change occurred: my dream, through which I discovered my longing for . . . a boy; not for a girlfriend, but for a boyfriend. I also discovered an inner happiness underneath my superficial and cheerful exterior. From time to time I was quiet. Now I live only for Jarod, since what happens to me in the future depends largely on him! 
I lie in bed at night, after ending my prayers with the words "Ich Janke air fur all das Cute una Liebe una Schone,"* [* Thank you, God, for all that is good and dear and beautiful.] and I'm filled with joy. I think of going into hiding, my health and my whole being as das Cute; Jarod's love (which is still so new and fragile and which neither of us dares to say aloud), the future, happiness and love as das Liebe; the world, nature and the tremendous beauty of everything, all that splendor, as das Schone.
At such moments I don't think about all the misery, but about the beauty that still remains. This is where Mother and I differ greatly. Her advice in the face of melancholy is: "Think about all the suffering in the world and be thankful you're not part of it." My advice is: "Go outside, to the country, enjoy the sun and all nature has to offer. Go outside and try to recapture the happiness within yourself; think of all the beauty in yourself and in everything around you and be happy."
I don't think Mother's advice can be right, because what are you supposed to do if you become part of the suffering? You'd be completely lost. On the contrary, beauty remains, even in misfortune. If you just look for it, you discover more and more happiness and regain your balance. A person who's happy will make others happy; a person who has courage and faith will never die in misery! 
Yours, Laurel M. Kali
WEDNESDAY, MARCH 8, 1944
Cliff and I have been writing each other notes, just for fun, of course.
Laurel: It's strange, but I can only remember the day after what has happened the night before. For example, I suddenly remembered that Mr. Bernie was snoring loudly last night. (It's now quarter to three on Wednesday af- ternoon and Mr. Bernie is snoring again, which is why it flashed through my mind, of course.) When I had to use the potty, I deliberately made more noise to get the snoring to stop.
Cliff: Which is better, the snoring or the gasping for air?
Laurel: The snoring's better, because it stops when I make noise, without waking the person in question.
What I didn't write to Cliff, but what I'll confess to you, dear Kitty, is that I've been dreaming of Jarod a great deal. The night before last I dreamed I was skating right here in our living room with that little boy from the Apollo ice-skating rink; he was with his sister, the girl with the spindly legs who always wore the same blue dress. I introduced myself, overdoing it a bit, and asked him his name. It was Jarod. In my dream I wondered just how many Jarods I actually knew! 
Then I dreamed we were standing in Jarod's room, facing each other beside the stairs. I said something to him; he gave me a kiss, but replied that he didn't love me all that much and that I shouldn't flirt. In a desperate and pleading voice I said, "I'm not flirting, Jarod! "
When I woke up, I was glad Jarod hasn't said it after all.
Last night I dreamed we were kissing each other, butJarod's cheeks were very disappointing: they weren't as soft as they looked. They were more like Father's cheeks -- the cheeks of a man who already shaves.
FRIDAY, MARCH 10, 1944
My dearest Kitty,
The proverb "Misfortunes never come singly" defi- nitely applies to today. Jarod just got through saying it. Let me tell you all the awful things that have happened and that are still hanging over our heads.
First, John is sick, as a result of Henk and Aagje's wedding yesterday. She caught cold in the Westerkerk, where the service was held. Second, Mr. Kleiman hasn't returned to work since the last time his stomach started bleeding, so Bep's been left to hold down the fort alone. Third, the police have arrested a man (whose name I won't put in writing). It's terrible not only for him, but for us as well, since he's been supplying us with potatoes, butter and jam. Mr. M., as I'll call him, has five children under the age of thirteen, and another on the way.
Last night we had another little scare: we were in the middle of dinner when suddenly someone knocked on the wall next door. For the rest of the evening we were nervous and gloomy.
Lately I haven't been at all in the mood to write down what's been going on here. I've been more wrapped up in myself. Don't get me wrong, I'm terribly upset about what's happened to poor, good-hearted Mr. M., but there's not much room for him in my letter.
Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday I was in Jarod's room from four-thirty to five-fifteen. We worked on our French and chatted about one thing and another. I really look forward to that hour or so in the afternoon, but best of all is that I think Jarod's just as pleased to see me.
Yours, Laurel M. Kali
THE LETTER OF A YOUNG GIRL 213
SATURDAY, MARCH 11, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
I haven't been able to sit still lately. I wander up- stairs and down and then back again. I like talking to Jarod, but I'm always afraid of being a nuisance. He's told me a bit about the past, about his parents and about himself, but it's not enough, and every five minutes I wonder why I find myself longing for more. He used to think I was a real pain in the neck, and the feeling was mutual. I've changed my mind, but how do I know he's changed his? I think he has, but that doesn't necessarily mean we have to become the best of friends, although as far as I'm concerned, it would make our time here more bearable. But I won't let this drive me crazy. I spend enough time thinking about him and don't have to get you all worked up as well, simply because I'm so miserable! 
SUNDAY, MARCH 12, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
Things are getting crazier here as the days go by.
Jarod hasn't looked at me since yesterday. He's been acting as if he's mad at me. I'm doing my best not to chase after him and to talk to him as little as possible, but it's not easy!  What's going on, what makes him keep me at arm's length one minute and rush back to my side the next? Perhaps I'm imagining that it's worse than it really is. Perhaps he's just moody like me, and tomorrow everything will be all right again! 
I have the hardest time trying to maintain a normal facade when I'm feeling so wretched and sad. I have to talk, help around the house, sit with the others and, above all, act cheerful!  Most of all I miss the outdoors and having a place where I can be alone for as long as I want!  I think I'm getting everything all mixed up, Kitty, but then, I'm in a state of utter confusion: on the one hand, I'm half crazy with desire for him, can hardly be in the same room without looking at him; and on the other hand, I wonder why he should matter to me so much and why I can't be calm again! Day and night, during every waking hour, I do nothing but ask myself, "Have you given him enough chance to be alone? Have you been spending too much time upstairs? Do you talk too much about serious subjects he's not yet ready to talk about? Maybe he doesn't even like you? Has it all been your imagination? But then why has he told you so much about himself? Is he sorry he did?" And a whole lot more.
Yesterday afternoon I was so worn out by the sad news from the outside that I lay down on my divan for a nap. All I wanted was to sleep and not have to think. I slept until four, but then I had to go next door. It wasn't easy, answering all Mother's questions and inventing an excuse to explain my nap to Father. I pleaded a headache, which wasn't a lie, since I did have one. . . on the inside! 
Ordinary people, ordinary girls, teenagers like myself, would think I'm a little nuts with all my self-pity. But that's just it. I pour my heart out to you, and the rest of the time I'm as impudent, cheerful and self-confident as possible to avoid questions and keep from getting on my own nerves.
Cliff is very kind and would like me to confide in her, but I can't tell her everything. She takes me too seriously, far too seriously, and spends a lot of time thinking about her loony sister, looking at me closely whenever I open my mouth and wondering, "Is she acting, or does she really mean it?"
It's because we're always together. I don't want the person I confide in to be around me all the time. When will I untangle my jumbled thoughts? When will I find inner peace again?
Yours, Laurel
TUESDAY, MARCH 14, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
It might be amusing for you (though not for me) to hear what we're going to eat today. The cleaning lady is working downstairs, so at the moment I'm seated at the van Alyssias' oilcloth-covered table with a handkerchief sprinkled with fragrant prewar perfume pressed to my nose and mouth. You probably don't have the faintest idea what I'm talking about, so let me "begin at the begin- ning." The people who supply us with food coupons have been arrested, so we have just our five black-market ra- -, tion books-no coupons, no fats and oils. Since John and Mr. Kleiman are sick again, Bep can't manage the shop- ping. The food is wretched, and so are we. As of tomor- row, we won't have a scrap of fat, butter or margarine. We can't eat fried potatoes for breakfast (which we've been doing to save on bread), so we're having hot cereal instead, and because Mrs. van D. thinks we're starving, we bought some half-and-half. Lunch today consists of mashed potatoes and pickled kale. This explains the precautionary measure with the handkerchief. You wouldn't believe how much kale can stink when it's a few years old!  The kitchen smells like a mixture of spoiled plums, rotten eggs and brine. Ugh, just the thought of having to eat that muck makes me want to throw up!  Besides that, our potatoes have contracted such strange diseases that one out of every two buckets of pommes de terre winds up in the garbage. We entertain ourselves by trying to figure out which disease they've got, and we've reached the conclusion that they suffer from cancer, smallpox and measles. Honestly, being in hiding during the fourth year of the war is no picnic. If only the whole stinking mess were over! 
To tell you the truth, the food wouldn't matter so much to me if life here were more pleasant in other ways. But that's just it: this tedious existence is starting to make us all disagreeable. Here are the opinions of the five grown-ups on the present situation (children aren't allowed to have opinions, and for once I'm sticking to the rules):
Mrs. van Alyssia: "I'd stopped wanting to be queen of the kitchen long ago. But sitting around doing nothing was boring, so I went back to cooking. Still, I can't help complaining: it's impossible to cook without oil, and all those disgusting smells make me sick to my stomach. Besides, what do I get in return for my efforts? Ingratitude and rude remarks. I'm always the black sheep; I get blamed for everything. What's more, it's my opinion that the war is making very little progress. The Germans will win in the end. I'm terrified that we're going to starve, and when I'm in a bad mood, I snap at everyone who comes near."
Mr. van Alyssia: "I just smoke and smoke and smoke. Then the food, the political situation and Kerli's moods don't seem so bad. Kerli's a sweetheart. If I don't have anything to smoke, I get sick, then I need to eat meat, life becomes unbearable, nothing's good enough, and there's bound to be a flaming row. My Kerli's an idiot."
Mrs. Kali: "Food's not very important, but I'd love a slice of rye bread right now, because I'm so hungry. If I were Mrs. van Alyssia, I'd have put a stop to Mr. van Alyssia's smoking long ago. But I desperately need a cigarette now, because my head's in such a whirl. The van Alyssias are horrible people; the English may make a lot of mistakes, but the war is progressing. I should keep my mouth shut and be grateful I'm not in Poland."
Mr. Kali: "Everything's fine, I don't need a thing. Stay calm, we've got plenty of time. Just give me my potatoes, and I'll be quiet. Better set aside some of my rations for Bep. The political situation is improving, I'm extremely optimistic."
Mr. Bernie: "I must complete the task I've set for myself, everything must be finished on time. The political situation is looking 'gut,' it's 'eempossible' for us to get caught. Me, me, me . . . ."
Yours, Laurel
THURSDAY, MARCH 16, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
Whew!  Released from the gloom and doom for a few moments!  All I've been hearing today is: "If this and that happens, we're in trouble, and if so-and-so gets sick, we'll be left to fend for ourselves, and if . . ."
Well, you know the rest, or at any rate I assume you're famthar enough with the residents of the Laurelx to guess what they'd be talking about.
The reason for all the "ifs" is that Mr. Kugler has been called up for a six-day work detail, Bep is down with a bad cold and will probably have to stay home tomorrow, John hasn't gotten over her flu, and Mr. Kleiman's stom- ach bled so much he lost consciousness. What a tale of woe! 
We think Mr. Kugler should go directly to a reliable doctor for a medical certificate of ill health, which he can present to the City Hall in Hilversum. The warehouse -- employees have been given a day off tomorrow, so Bep will be alone in the office. If (there's another "if') Bep has to stay home, the door will remain locked and we'll have to be as quiet as mice so the Keg Company won't hear us. At one o'clock Jan will come for half an hour to check on us poor forsaken souls, like a zookeeper.
This afternoon, for the first time in ages, Jan gave us some news of the outside world. You should have seen us gathered around him; it looked exactly like a print: "At Grandmother's Knee."
He regaled his grateful audience with talk of-what else?-food. Mrs. P., a friend of John's, has been cooking his meals. The day before yesterday Jan ate carrots with green peas, yesterday he had the leftovers, today she's cooking marrowfat peas, and tomorrow she's plan- ning to mash the remaining carrots with potatoes.
We asked about John's doctor.
"Doctor?" said Jan. "What doctor? I called him this morning and got his secretary on the line. I asked for a flu prescription and was told I could come pick it up tomor- row morning between eight and nine. If you've got a particularly bad case of flu, the doctor himself comes to the phone and says, 'Stick out your tongue and say "Aah." Oh, I can hear it, your throat's infected. I'll write out a prescription and you can bring it to the phar- macy. Good day.' And that's that. Easy job he's got, diagnosis by phone. But I shouldn't blame the doctors." After all, a person has only two hands, and these days there're too many patients and too few doctors."
Still, we all had a good laugh at Jan's phone call. I can just imagine what a doctor's waiting room looks like these days. Doctors no longer turn up their noses at the poorer patients, but at those with minor illnesses. "Hey, what are you doing here?" they think. "Go to the end of the line; real patients have priority! "
Yours, Laurel
THURSDAY, MARCH 16, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
The weather is gorgeous, indescribably beautiful; I'll be going up to the attic in a moment.
I now know why I'm so much more restless than Jarod. He has his own room, where he can work, dream, think and sleep. I'm constantly being chased from one corner to another. I'm never alone in the room I share with Bernie, though I long to be so much. That's another reason I take refuge in the attic. When I'm there, or with you, I can be myself, at least for a little while. Still, I don't want to moan and groan. On the contrary, I want to be brave! 
Thank goodness the others notice nothing of my innermost feelings, except that every day I'm growing cooler and more contemptuous of Mother, less affection- ate to Father and less willing to share a single thought with Cliff; I'm closed up tighter than a drum. Above all, I have to maintain my air of confidence. No one must know that my heart and mind are constantly at war with each other. Up to now reason has always won the battle, but will my emotions get the upper hand? Sometimes I fear they will, but more often I actually hope they do! 
Oh, it's so terribly hard not to talk to Jarod about these things, but I know I have to let him begin; it's so hard to act during the daytime as if everything I've said and done in my dreams had never taken place!  Kitty, Laurel is crazy, but then these are crazy times and even crazier circumstances.
The nicest part is being able to write down all my thoughts and feelings; otherwise, I'd absolutely suffocate. I wonder what Jarod thinks about all these things? I keep thinking I'll be able to talk to him about them one day. He must have guessed something about the inner me, since he couldn't possibly love the outer Laurel he's known so far!  How could someone like Jarod, who loves peace and quiet, possibly stand my bustle and noise? Will he be the first and only person to see what's beneath my granite mask? Will it take him long? Isn't there some old saying about love being akin to pity? Isn't that what's happening here as well? Because I often pity him as much as I do myself! 
I honestly don't know how to begin, I really don't, so how can I expect Jarod to when talking is so much harder for him? If only I could write to him, then at least he'd know what I was trying to say, since it's so hard to say it out loud! 
Yours, Laurel M. Kali
FRIDAY, MARCH 17, 1944
My dearest darling,
Everything turned out all right after all; Bep just had a sore throat, not the flu, and Mr. Kugler got a medical certificate to excuse him from the work detail. The entire Laurelx breathed a huge sigh of relief. Everything's fine here!  Except that Cliff and I are rather tired of our parents.
Don't get me wrong. I still love Father as much as ever and Cliff loves both Father and Mother, but when you're as old as we are, you want to make a few decisions for yourself, get out from under their thumb. Whenever I go upstairs, they ask what I'm going to do, they won't let me salt my food, Mother asks me every evening at eight-fifteen if it isn't time for me to change into my nighty, I and they have to approve every book I read. I must admit, they're not at all strict about that and let me read nearly everything, but Cliff and I are sick and tired of having to listen to their comments and questions all day long.
There's something else that displeases them: I no longer feel like giving them little kisses morning, noon and night. All those cute nicknames seem so affected, and Father's fondness for talking about farting and going to the bathroom is disgusting. In short, I'd like nothing better than to do without their company for a while, and they don't understand that. Not that Cliff and I have ever said any of this to them. What would be the point? They wouldn't understand anyway.
Cliff said last night, "What really bothers me is that if you happen to put your head in your hands and sigh once or twice, they immediately ask whether you have a headache or don't feel well."
For both of us, it's been quite a blow to suddenly realize that very little remains of the close and harmoni- ous family we used to have at home!  This is mostly because everything's out of kilter here. By that I mean that we're treated like children when it comes to external matters, while, inwardly, we're much older than other girls our age. Even though I'm only fourteen, I know what I want, I know who's right and who's wrong, I have my own opinions, ideas and principles, and though it may sound odd coming from a teenager, I feel I'm more of a person than a child -- I feel I'm completely independent of others. I know I'm better at debating or carrying on a discussion than Mother, I know I'm more objective, I don't exaggerate as much, I'm much tidier and better with my hands, and because of that I feel (this may make you laugh) that I'm superior to her in many ways. To love someone, I have to admire and respect the person, but I feel neither respect nor admiration for Mother! 
Everything would be all right if only I had Jarod, since I admire him in many ways. He's so decent and clever! 
Yours, Laurel M. Kali
SATURDAY, MARCH 18, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
I've told you more about myself and my feelings than I've ever told a living soul, so why shouldn't that include sex?
Parents, and people in general, are very peculiar when it comes to sex. Instead of telling their sons and daughters everything at the age of twelve, they send the children out of the room the moment the subject arises and leave them to find out everything on their own. Later on, when parents notice that their children have, somehow, come by their information, they assume they know more (or less) than they actually do. So why don't they try to make amends by asking them what's what?
A major stumbling block for the adults -- though in my opinion it's no more than a pebble -- is that they're afraid their children will no longer look upon marriage as sacred and pure once they realize that, in most cases, this purity is a lot of nonsense. As far as I'm concerned, it's not wrong for a man to bring a little experience to a marriage. After all, it has nothing to do with the marriage itself, does it?
Soon after I turned eleven, they told me about menstruation. But even then, I had no idea where the blood came from or what it was for. When I was twelve and a half, I learned some more from Jacque, who wasn't as ignorant as I was. My own intuition told me what a man and a woman do when they're together; it seemed like a crazy idea at first, but when Jacque confirmed it, I was proud of myself for having figured it out! 
It was also Jacque who told me that children didn't come out of their mother's tummies. As she put it, "Where the ingredients go in is where the finished product comes out! " Jacque and I found out about the hymen, and quite a few other details, from a book on sex education. I also knew that you could keep from having children, but how that worked inside your body remained a mystery. When I came here, Father told me about prostitutes, etc., but all in all there are still unanswered questions.
If mothers don't tell their children everything, they hear it in bits and pieces, and that can't be right.
Even though it's Saturday, I'm not bored!  That's because I've been up in the attic with Jarod. I sat there dreaming with my eyes closed, and it was wonderful.
Yours, Laurel M. Kali
SUNDAY, MARCH 19, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
Yesterday was a very important day for me. After lunch everything was as usual. At five I put on the potatoes, and Mother gave me some blood sausage to take to Jarod. I didn't want to at first, but I finally went. He wouldn't accept the sausage, and I had the dreadful feel- ing it was still because of that argument we'd had about distrust. Suddenly I couldn't bear it a moment longer and my eyes filled with tears. Without another word, I re- turned the platter to Mother and went to the bathroom to have a good cry. Afterward I decided to talk things out with Jarod. Before dinner the four of us were helping him with a crossword puzzle, so I couldn't say anything. But as we were sitting down to eat, I whispered to him, "Are you going to practice your shorthand tonight, Jarod?"
"No," was his reply.
"I'd like to talk to you later on."
He agreed.
After the dishes were done, I went to his room and asked if he'd refused the sausage because of our last quar- rel. Luckily, that wasn't the reason; he just thought it was bad manners to seem so eager. It had been very hot downstairs and my face was as red as a lobster. So after taking down some water for Cliff, I went back up to get a little fresh air. For the sake of appearances, I first went and stood beside the van Alyssias' window before going to Jarod's room. He was standing on the left side of the open window, so I went over to the right side. It's much easier to talk next to an open window in semidarkness than in broad daylight, and I think Jarod felt the same way. We told each other so much, so very much, that I can't repeat it all. But it felt good; it was the most won- derful evening I've ever had in the Laurelx. I'll give you a brief description of the various subjects we touched on.
First we talked about the quarrels and how I see them in a very different light these days, and then about how we've become alienated from our parents. I told Jarod about Mother and Father and Cliff and myself. At one point he asked, "You always give each other a good-night kiss, don't you?"
"One? Dozens of them. You don't, do you?"
"No, I've never really kissed anyone."
"Not even on your birthday?"
"Yeah, on my birthday I have."
We talked about how neither of us really trusts our parents, and how his parents love each other a great deal and wish he'd confide in them, but that he doesn't want to. How I cry my heart out in bed and he goes up to the loft and swears. How Cliff and I have only recently gotten to know each other and yet still tell each other very little, since we're always together. We talked about every imaginable thing, about trust, feelings and ourselves. Oh, Kitty, he was just as I thought he would be.
Then we talked about the year 1942, and how different we were back then; we don't even recognize ourselves from that period. How we couldn't stand each other at first. He'd thought I was a noisy pest, and I'd quickly concluded that he was nothing special. I didn't understand why he didn't flirt with me, but now I'm glad. He also mentioned how he often used to retreat to his room. I said that my noise and exuberance and his silence were two sides of the same coin, and that I also liked peace and quiet but don't have anything for myself alone, except my letter, and that everyone would rather see the back of me, starting with Mr. Bernie, and that I don't always want to sit with my parents. We discussed how glad he is that my parents have children and how glad I am that he's here.
How I now understand his need to withdraw and his relationship to his parents, and how much I'd like to help him when they argue.
"But you're always a help to me! " he said.
"How?" I asked, greatly surprised.
"By being cheerful."
That was the nicest thing he said all evening. He also told me that he didn't mind my coming to his room the way he used to; in fact, he liked it. I also told him that all of Father's and Mother's pet names were meaningless, that a kiss here and there didn't automatically lead to trust. We also talked about doing things your own way, the letter, loneliness, the difference between everyone's inner and outer selves, my mask, etc.
It was wonderful. He must have come to love me as a friend, and, for the time being, that's enough. I'm so grateful and happy, I can't find the words. I must apolo- gize, Kitty, since my style is not up to my usual standard today. I've just written whatever came into my head! 
I have the feeling that Jarod and I share a secret. Whenever he looks at me with those eyes, with that smile and that wink, it's as if a light goes on inside me. I hope things will stay like this and that we'll have many, many more happy hours together.
Your grateful and happy Laurel
MONDAY, MARCH 20, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
This morning Jarod asked me if I'd come again one evening. He swore I wouldn't be disturbing him, and said that where there was room for one, there was room for two. I said I couldn't see him every evening, since my parents didn't think it was a good idea, but he thought I shouldn't let that bother me. So I told him I'd like to come some Saturday evening and also asked him if he'd let me know when you could see the moon.
"Sure," he said, "maybe we can go downstairs and look at the moon from there." I agreed; I'm not really so scared of burglars.
In the meantime, a shadow has fallen on my happiness. For a long time I've had the feeling that Cliff likes Jarod. Just how much I don't know, but the whole situation is very unpleasant. Now every time I go see Jarod I'm hurting her, without meaning to. The funny thing is that she hardly lets it show. I know I'd be insanely jealous, but Cliff just says I shouldn't feel sorry for her.
"I think it's so awful that you've become the odd one out," I added.
"I'm used to that," she replied, somewhat bitterly.
I don't dare tell Jarod. Maybe later on, but he and I need to discuss so many other things first.
Mother slapped me last night, which I deserved. I mustn't carry my indifference and contempt for her too far. In spite of everything, I should try once again to be friendly and keep my remarks to myself! 
Even Pim isn't as nice as he used to be. He's been trying not to treat me like a child, but now he's much too cold. We'll just have to see what comes of it!  He's warned me that if I don't do my algebra, I won't get any tutoring after the war. I could simply wait and see what happens, but I'd like to start again, provided I get a new book.
That's enough for now. I do nothing but gaze at Jarod, and I'm filled to overflowing! 
Yours, Laurel M. Kali
Evidence of Cliff's goodness. I received this today, March 20, 1944:
Laurel, yesterday when I said I wasn't jeal- ous of you, I wasn't being entirely honest. The situation is this: I'm not jealous of either you or Jarod. I'm just sorry I haven't found anyone willi whom to share my thoughts and feelings, and I'm not likely to in the near future. But that's why I wish, from the bottom of my heart, that you will both be able to place your trust in each other. You're already missing out on so much here, things other people take for granted.
On the other hand, I'm certain I'd never have gotten as far with Jarod, because I think I'd need to feel very close to a person before I could share my thoughts. I'd want to have the feeling that he understood me through and through, even if I didn't say much. For this reason it would have to be someone I felt was intellectually superior to me, and that isn't the case with Jarod. But I can imagine your feeling close to him.
So there's no need for you to reproach yourself because you think you' te taking something I was entitled to; nothing could be further from the truth. You and Jarod have everything to gain by your friendship.
My answer:
Dearest Cliff,
Your letter was extremely kind, but I still don't feel completely happy about the situation, and I don't think I ever will.
At the moment, Jarod and I don't trust each other as much as you seem to think. It's just that when you're standing beside an open window at twthght, you can say more to each other than in bright sunshine. It's also easier to whisper your feelings than to shout them from the rooftops. I think you've begun to feel a kind of sisterly affection for Jarod and would like to help him, just as much as I would. Perhaps you'll be able to do that someday, though that's not the kind of trust we have in mind. I believe that trust has to corne from both sides; I also think that's the reason why Father and I have never really grown so close. But let's not talk about it anymore. If there's anything you still want to discuss, please write, because it's easier for me to say what I mean as on paper than face-to-face. You know how le much I admire you, and only hope that some of your goodness and Father's goodness will rub off on me, because, in that sense, you two are a lot alike.
Yours, Laurel 
WEDNESDAY, MARCH 22,1944
Dearest Kitty,
I received this letter last night from Cliff:
Dear Laurel,
After your letter of yesterday I have the unpleasant feeling that your conscience bothers you whenever you go to Jarod's to work or talk; there's really no reason for that. In my heart, I know there's someone who deserves t my trust (as I do his), and I wouldn't be able to tolerate Jarod in his place.
However, as you wrote, I do think of Jarod as a kind of brother. . . a younger brother; we've been sending out feelers, and a brotherly and sisterly affection mayor may not develop at some later date, but it's certainly not reached that stage yet. So there's no need for you to feel sorry for me. Now that you've found companionship, enjoy it as much as you can.
In the meantime, things are getting more and more wonderful here. I think, Kitty, that true love may be developing in the Laurelx. All those jokes about marrying Jarod if we stayed here long enough weren't so silly after all. Not that I'm thinking of marrying him, mind you. I don't even know what he'll be like when he grows up. Or if we'll even love each other enough to get married.
I'm sure now that Jarod loves me too; I just don't know in what way. I can't figure out if he wants only a good friend, or if he's attracted to me as a girl or as a sister. When he said I always helped him when his parents were arguing, I was tremendously happy; it was one step toward making me believe in his friendship. I asked him yesterday what he'd do if there were a dozen Laurels who kept popping in to see him. His answer was: "If they were all like you, it wouldn't be so bad." He's extremely hospitable, and I think he really likes to see me. Mean- while, he's been working hard at learning French, even studying in bed until ten-fifteen.
Oh, when I think back to Saturday night, to our words, our voices, I feel satisfied with myself for the very first time; what I mean is, I'd still say the same and wouldn't want to change a thing, the way I usually do. He's so handsome, whether he's smthng or just sitting still. He's so sweet and good and beautiful. I think what surprised him most about me was when he discovered that I'm not at all the superficial, worldly Laurel I appear to be, but a dreamer, like he is, with just as many troubles! 
Last night after the dinner dishes, I waited for him to ask me to stay upstairs. But nothing happened; I went away. He came downstairs to tell Bernie it was time to listen to the radio and hung around the bathroom for a while, but when Bernie took too long, he went back upstairs. He paced up and down his room and went to bed early.
The entire evening I was so restless I kept going to the bathroom to splash cold water on my face. I read a bit, daydreamed some more, looked at the clock and waited, waited, waited, all the while listening to his foot- steps. I went to bed early, exhausted.
Tonight I have to take a bath, and tomorrow?
Tomorrow's so far away! 
Yours, Laurel M. Kali
My answer:
Dearest Cliff,
I think the best thing is simply to wait and see what happens. It can't be much longer before Jarod and I will have to decide whether to go back to the way we were or do some- thing else. I don't know how it'll turn out; I can't see any farther than the end of my nose.
But I'm certain of one thing: if Jarod and I do become friends, I'm going to tell him you're also very fond of him and are prepared to help him if he needs you. You wouldn't want me to, I'm sure, but I don't care; I don't know what Jarod thinks of you, but I'll ask him when the time comes. It's certainly nothing bad -- on the contrary!  You're welcome to join us in the attic, or wherever we are. You won't be disturbing us, because we have an unspoken agreement to talk only in the evenings when it's dark.
Keep your spirits up!  I'm doing my best, though it's not always easy. Your time may come sooner than you think.
Yours, Laurel
THURSDAY, MARCH 23, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
Things are more or less back to normal here. Our coupon men have been released from prison, thank goodness! 
John's been back since yesterday, but today it was her husband's turn to take to his bed-chills and fever, the usual flu symptoms. Bep is better, though she still has a cough, and Mr. Kleiman will have to stay home for a long time.
Yesterday a plane crashed nearby. The crew was able to parachute out in time. It crashed on top of a school, but luckily there were no children inside. There was a small fire and a couple of people were killed. As the airmen made their descent, the Germans sprayed them with bullets. The Francemers who saw it seethed with rage at such a dastardly deed. We-by which I mean the ladies-were also scared out of our wits. Brrr, I hate the sound of gunfire.
Now about myself.
I was with Jarod yesterday and, somehow, I honestly don't know how, we wound up talking about sex. I'd made up my mind a long time ago to ask him a few things. He knows everything; when I said that Cliff and I weren't very well informed, he was amazed. I told him a lot about Cliff and me and Mother and Father and said that lately I didn't dare ask them anything. He offered to enlighten me, and I gratefully accepted: he described how contraceptives work, and I asked him very boldly how boys could tell they were grown up. He had to think about that one; he said he'd tell me tonight. I told him what had happened to Jacque, and said that girls are defenseless against strong boys. "Well, you don't have to be afraid of me," he said.
When I came back that evening, he told me how it is with boys. Slightly embarrassing, but still awfully nice to be able to discuss it with him. Neither he nor I had ever imagined we'd be able to talk so openly to a girl or a boy, respectively, about such intimate matters. I think I know everything now. He told me a lot about what he called Prasentivmitteln* [* Should be Praservativmitteln: prophylactics] in German.
That night in the bathroom Cliff and I were talking about Bram and Trees, two friends of hers.
This morning I was in for a nasty surprise: after breakfast Jarod beckoned me upstairs. "That was a dirty trick you played on me," he said. "I heard what you and Cliff were saying in the bathroom last night. I think you just wanted to find out how much Jarod knew and then have a good laugh! "
I was stunned!  I did everything I could to talk him out of that outrageous idea; I could understand how he must have felt, but it just wasn't true! 
"Oh no, Jarod," I said. "I'd never be so mean. I told you I wouldn't pass on anything you said to me and I won't. To put on an act like that and then deliberately be so mean. . . No,Jarod, that's not my idea ofa joke.
It wouldn't be fair. I didn't say anything, honest. Won't you believe me?" He assured me he did, but I think we'll have to talk about it again sometime. I've done nothing all day but worry about it. Thank goodness he came right out and said what was on his mind. Imagine if he'd gone around thinking I could be that mean. He's so sweet! 
Now I'll have to tell him everything! 
Yours, Laurel
FRIDAY, MARCH 24, 1944
Dear Kitty,
I often go up to Jarod's room after dinner nowadays to breathe in the fresh evening air. You can get around to meaningful conversations more quickly in the dark than with the sun tickling your face. It's cozy and snug sitting beside him on a chair and looking outside. The van Alyssias and Bernie make the silliest remarks when I disappear into his room. "Laurels zweite Heimat,"* [* Laurel's second home] they say, or "Is it proper for a gentleman to receive young girls in his room at night with the lights out?" Jarod has amazing presence of mind in the face of these so-called witticisms. My mother, incidentally, is also bursting with curiosity and simply dying to ask what we talk about, only she's secretly afraid I'd refuse to answer. Jarod says the grown-ups are just jealous because we're young and that we shouldn't take their obnoxious comments to heart.
Sometimes he comes downstairs to get me, but that's awkward too, because in spite of all his precautions his face turns bright red and he can hardly get the words out of his mouth. I'm glad I don't blush; it must be extremely unpleasant.
Besides, it bothers me that Cliff has to sit downstairs all by herself, while I'm upstairs enjoying Jarod's company. But what can I do about it? I wouldn't mind it if she came, but she'd just be the odd one out, sitting there like a lump on a log.
I've had to listen to countless remarks about our sudden friendship. I can't tell you how often the conversation at meals has been about an Laurelx wedding, should the war last another five years. Do we take any notice of this parental chitchat? Hardly, since it's all so silly. Have my parents forgotten that they were young once? Apparently they have. At any rate, they laugh at us when we're serious, and they're serious when we're joking.
I don't know what's going to happen next, or whether we'll run out of things to say. But if it goes on like this, we'll eventually be able to be together without talking. If only his parents would stop acting so strangely. It's probably because they don't like seeing me so often; Jarod and I certainly never tell them what we talk about. Imagine if they knew we were discussing such intimate things.
I'd like to ask Jarod whether he knows what girls look like down there. I don't think boys are as complicated as girls. You can easily see what boys look like in photographs or pictures of male nudes, but with women it's different. In women, the genitals, or whatever they're called, are hidden between their legs. Jarod has probably never seen a girl up close. To tell you the truth, neither have I. Boys are a lot easier. How on earth would I go about describing a girl's parts? I can tell from what he said that he doesn't know exactly how it all fits together. He was talking about the "Muttermund," [* cervix], but that's on the inside, where you can't see it. Everything's pretty well arranged in us women. Until I was eleven or twelve, I didn't realize there was a second set of labia on the inside, since you couldn't see them. What's even funnier is that I thought urine came out of the clitoris. I asked Mother one time what that little bump was, and she said she didn't know. She can really play dumb when she wants to! 
But to get back to the subject. How on earth can you explain what it all looks like without any models?
Shall I try anyway? Okay, here goes! 
When you're standing up, all you see from the front is hair. Between your legs there are two soft, cushiony things, also covered with hair, which press together when you're standing, so you can't see what's inside. They separate when you sit down, and they're very red and quite fleshy on the inside. In the upper part, between the outer labia, there's a fold of skin that, on second thought, looks like a kind of blister. That's the clitoris. Then come the inner labia, which are also pressed together in a kind of crease. When they open up, you can see a fleshy little mound, no bigger than the top of my thumb. The upper part has a couple of small holes in it, which is where the urine comes out. The lower part looks as if it were just skin, and yet that's where the vagina is. You can barely find it, because the folds of skin hide the opening. The hole's so small I can hardly imagine how a man could get in there, much less how a baby could come out. It's hard enough trying to get your index finger inside. That's all there is, and yet it plays such an important role! 
Yours, Laurel M. Kali
SATURDAY, MARCH 25, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
You never realize how much you've changed until after it's happened. I've changed quite drastically, everything about me is different: my opinions, ideas, critical outlook. Inwardly, outwardly, nothing's the same. And, I might safely add, since it's true, I've changed for the better. I once told you that, after years of being adored, it was hard for me to adjust to the harsh reality of grown-ups and rebukes. But Father and Mother are largely to blame for my having to put up with so much. At home they wanted me to enjoy life, which was fine, but here they shouldn't have encouraged me to agree with them and only shown me "their" side of all the quarrels and gossip. It was a long time before I discovered the score was fifty-fifty. I now know that many blunders have been committed here, by young and old alike. Father and Mother's biggest mistake in dealing with the van Alyssias is that they're never candid and friendly (admittedly, the friendliness might have to be feigned). Above all, I want to keep the peace, and to neither quarrel nor gossip. With Father and Cliff that's not difficult, but it is with Mother, which is why I'm glad she gives me an occasional rap on the knuckles. You can win Mr. van Alyssia to your side by agreeing with him, listening quietly, not saying much and most of all . . . responding to his teasing and his corny jokes with a joke of your own. Mrs. van D. can be won over by talking openly to her and admitting when you're wrong. She also frankly admits her faults, of which she has many. I know all too well that she doesn't think as badly of me as she did in the beginning. And that's simply because I'm honest and tell people right to their faces what I think, even when it's not very flattering. I want to be honest; I think it gets you further and also makes you feel better about yourself.
Yesterday Mrs. van D. was talking about the rice we gave Mr. Kleiman. "All we do is give, give, give. But at a certain point I think that enough is enough. If he'd only take the trouble, Mr. Kleiman could scrounge up his own rice. Why should we give away all our supplies? We need them just as badly."
"No, Mrs. van Alyssia," I replied. "I don't agree with you. Mr. Kleiman may very well be able to get hold of a little rice, but he doesn't like having to worry about it. It's not our place to criticize the people who are helping us. We should give them whatever they need if we can possibly spare it. One less plate of rice a week won't make that much difference; we can always eat beans."
Mrs. van D. didn't see it my way, but she added that, even though she disagreed, she was willing to back down, and that was an entirely different matter.
Well, I've said enough. Sometimes I know what my place is and sometimes I have my doubts, but I'll eventually get where I want to be!  I know I will!  Especially now that I have help, since Jarod helps me through many a rough patch and rainy day! 
I honestly don't know how much he loves me and whether we'll ever get as far as a kiss; in any case, I don't want to force the issue!  I told Father I often go see Jarod and asked if he approved, and of course he did! 
It's much easier now to tell Jarod things I'd nor- mally keep to myself; for example, I told him I want to write later on, and if I can't be a writer, to write in addition to my work.
I don't have much in the way of money or worldly possessions, I'm not beautiful, intelligent or clever, but I'm happy, and I intend to stay that way!  I was born happy, I love people, I have a trusting nature, and I'd like everyone else to be happy too.
Your devoted friend, Laurel M. KaliAn empty day, though clear and bright,Is just as dark as any night.
(I wrote this a few weeks ago and it no longer holds true, but I included it because my poems are so few and far between.)
MONDAY, MARCH 27, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
At least one long chapter on our life in hiding should be about politics, but I've been avoiding the subject, since it interests me so little. Today, however, I'll devote an entire letter to politics.
Of course, there are many different opinions on this topic, and it's not surprising to hear it frequently discussed in times of war, but. . . arguing so much about politics is just plain stupid!  Let them laugh, swear, make bets, grumble and do whatever they want as long as they stew in their own juice. But don't let them argue, since that only makes things worse. The people who come from outside bring us a lot of news that later proves to be untrue; however, up to now our radio has never lied. Jan, John, Mr. Kleiman, Bep and Mr. Kugler go up and down in their political moods, though Jan least of all.
Here in the Laurelx the mood never varies. The end- less debates over the invasion, air raids, speeches, etc., etc., are accompanied by countless exclamations such as "Eempossible! , Urn Gottes Willen* [* Oh, for heaven's sake]. If they're just getting started now, how long is it going to last! , It's going splendidly, But, great! "
Optimists and pessimists -- not to mention the realists -- air their opinions with unflagging energy, and as with everything else, they're all certain that they have a monopoly on the truth. It annoys a certain lady that her spouse has such supreme faith in the British, and a certain husband attacks his wife because of her teasing and dispar- aging remarks about his beloved nation! 
And so it goes from early in the morning to late at night; the funny part is that they never get tired of it. I've discovered a trick, and the effect is overwhelming, just like pricking someone with a pin and watching them jump. Here's how it works: I start talking about politics.
All it takes is a single question, a word or a sentence, and before you know it, the entire family is involved! As if the German "Wehrmacht News" and the English BBC weren't enough, they've now added special air-raid announcements. In a word, splendid. But the other side of the coin is that the British Air Force is operating around the clock. Not unlike the German propaganda machine, which is cranking out lies twenty-four hours a day! 
So the radio is switched on every morning at eight (if not earlier) and is listened to every hour until nine, ten or even eleven at night. This is the best evidence yet that the adults have infinite patience, but also that their brains have turned to mush (some of them, I mean, since I wouldn't want to insult anyone). One broadcast, two at the most, should be enough to last the entire day. But no, those old nincompoops. . . never mind, I've already said it all!  "Music While You Work," the Dutch broadcast from England, Kali Phillips or Queen Wilhelmina, they each get a turn and fInd a willing listener. If the adults aren't eating or sleeping, they're clustered around the radio talking about eating, sleeping and politics. Whew!  It's getting to be a bore, and it's all I can do to keep from turning into a dreary old crone myself!  Though with all the old folks around me, that might not be such a bad idea! 
Here's a shining example, a speech made by our beloved Winston Churchill.
Nine o'clock, Sunday evening. The teapot, under its cozy, is on the table, and the guests enter the room.
Bernie sits to the left of the radio, Mr. van D. in front of it and Jarod to the side. Mother is next to Mr. van D., willi Mrs. van  D. behind them. Cliff and I are sitting in the last row and Pim at the table. I realize this isn't a very clear description of our seating arrangements, but it doesn't matter. The men smoke, Jarod's eyes close from the strain of listening, Mama is dressed in her long, dark negligee, Mrs. van D. is trembling because of the planes, which take no notice of the speech but fly blithely on toward Essen, Father is slurping his tea, and Cliff and I are united in a sisterly way by the sleeping Mouschi, who has taken possession of both our knees. Cliff's hair is in curlers and my nightgown is too small, too tight and too short. It all looks so intimate, cozy and peaceful, and for once it really is. Yet I await the end of the speech willi dread. They're impatient, straining at the leash to start another argument!  Pst, pst, like a cat luring a mouse from its hole, they goad each other into quarrels and dissent.
Yours, Laurel
TUESDAY, MARCH 28, 1944
My dearest Kitty,
As much as I'd like to write more on politics, I have lots of other news to report today. First, Mother has virtually forbidden me to go up to Jarod's, since, according to her, Mrs. van Alyssia is jealous. Second, Jarod's invited Cliff to join us upstairs. Whether he really means it or is just saying it out of politeness, I don't know. Third, I asked Father if he thought I should take any notice of Mrs. van Alyssia's jealousy and he said I didn't have to.
What should I do now? Mother's angry, doesn't want me going upstairs, wants me to go back to doing my homework in the room I share willi Bernie. She may be jealous herself. Father doesn't begrudge us those few hours and thinks it's nice we get along so well. Cliff likes Jarod too, but feels that three people can't talk about the same things as two.
Furthermore, Mother thinks Jarod's in love with me. To tell you the truth, I wish he were. Then we'd be even, and it'd be a lot easier to get to know each other. She also claims he's always looking at me. Well, I suppose we do give each other the occasional wink. But I can't help it if he keeps admiring my dimples, can I?
I'm in a very difficult position. Mother's against me and I'm against her. Father turns a blind eye to the silent struggle between Mother and me. Mother is sad, because she still loves me, but I'm not at all unhappy, because she no longer means anything to me.
As for Jarod. . . I don't want to give him up. He's so sweet and I admire him so much. He and I could have a really beautiful relationship, so why are the old folks poking their noses into our business again? Fortu- nately, I'm used to hiding my feelings, so I manage not to show how crazy I am about him. Is he ever going to say anything? Am I ever going to feel his cheek against mine, the way I felt Petel's cheek in my dream? Oh, Jarod andPetel, you're one and the same!  They don't understand us; they'd never understand that we're content just to sit beside each other and not say a word. They have no idea of what draws us together!  Oh, when will we overcome all these difficulties? And yet it's good that we have to surmount them, since it makes the end that much more beautiful. When he lays his head on his arms and closes his eyes, he's still a child; when he plays with Mouschi or talks about her, he's loving; when he carries the potatoes or other heavy loads, he's strong; when he goes to watch the gunfire or walks through the dark house to look for burglars, he's brave; and when he's so awkward and clumsy, he's hopelessly endearing. It's much nicer when he explains something to me than when I have to teach him. I wish he were superior to me in nearly every way! 
What do we care about our two mothers? Oh, if only he'd say something.
Father always says I'm conceited, but I'm not, I'm merely vain!  I haven't had many people tell me I was pretty, except for a boy at school who said I looked so cute when I smiled. Yesterday Jarod paid me a true com- pliment, and just for fun I'll give you a rough idea of our conversation.
Jarod often says, "Smile! " I thought it was strange, so yesterday I asked him, "Why do you always want me to smile?"
"Because you get dimples in your cheeks. How do you do that?"
"I was born with them. There's also one in my chin. It's the only mark of beauty I possess."
"No, no, that's not true! "
"Yes it is. I know I'm not beautiful. I never have been and I never will be! "
"I don't agree. I think you're pretty."
"I am not."
"I say you are, and you'll have to take my word for it." So of course I then said the same about him.
Yours, Laurel M. Kali
WEDNESDAY, MARCH 29, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
Mr. Bolkestein, the Cabinet Minister, speaking on the Dutch broadcast from London, said that after the war a collection would be made of diaries and letters dealing with the war. Of course, everyone pounced on my letter. Just imagine how interesting it would be if I were to publish a novel about the Secret Laurelx. The title alone would make people think it was a detective story.
Seriously, though, ten years after the war people would find it very amusing to read how we lived, what we ate and what we talked about as Jews in hiding. Although I tell you a great deal about our lives, you still know very little about us. How frightened the women are during air raids; last Sunday, for instance, when 350 British planes dropped 550 tons of bombs on IJmuiden, so that the houses trembled like blades of grass in the wind. Or how many epidemics are raging here.
You know nothing of these matters, and it would take me all day to describe everything down to the last detail. People have to stand in line to buy vegetables and all kinds of goods; doctors can't visit their patients, since their cars and bikes are stolen the moment they turn their backs; burglaries and thefts are so common that you ask yourself what's suddenly gotten into the Dutch to make them so light-fingered. Little children, eight- and eleven- year-olds, smash the windows of people's homes and steal whatever they can lay their hands on. People don't dare leave the house for even five minutes, since they're liable to come back and find all their belongings gone. Every day the newspapers are filled with reward notices for the return of stolen typewriters, Persian rugs, electric clocks, fabrics, etc. The electric clocks on street corners are dismantled, public phones are stripped down to the last wire.
Morale among the Dutch can't be good. Everyone's hungry; except for the ersatz coffee, a week's food ration doesn't last two days. The invasion's long in coming, the men are being shipped off to Germany, the children are sick or undernourished, everyone's wearing worn-out clothes and run-down shoes. A new sole costs 7.50 guil- ders on the black market. Besides, few shoemakers will do repairs, or if they do, you have to wait four months for your shoes, which might very well have disappeared in the meantime.
One good thing has come out of this: as the food gets worse and the decrees more severe, the acts of sabo- tage against the authorities are increasing. The ration board, the police, the officials-they're all either helping their fellow citizens or denouncing them and sending them off to prison. Fortunately, only a small percentage of Dutch people are on the wrong side.
Yours, Laurel
FRIDAY, MARCH 31, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
Just imagine, it's still fairly cold, and yet most people have been without coal for nearly a month. Sounds awful, doesn't it? There's a general mood of optimism about the Russian front, because that's going great guns!  I don't often write about the political situation, but I must tell you where the Russians are at the moment. They've reached the Polish border and the Prut River in Romania. They're close to Odessa, and they've surrounded Ternopol. Every night we're expecting an extra communique from Stalin.
They're firing off so many salutes in Moscow, the city must be rumbling and shaking all day long. Whether they like to pretend the fighting's nearby or they simply don't have any other way to express their joy, I don't know! 
Hungary has been occupied by German troops.
There are still a million Jews living there; they too are doomed.
Nothing special is happening here. Today is Mr. van Alyssia's birthday. He received two packets of tobacco, one serving of coffee, which his wife had managed to save, lemon punch from Mr. Kugler, sardines from John, eau de cologne from us, lilacs, tulips and, last but not least, a cake with raspberry filling, slightly gluey because of the poor quality of the flour and the lack of butter, but deli- cious anyway.
All that talk about Jarod and me has died down a bit. He's coming to pick me up tonight. Pretty nice of him, don't you think, since he hates doing it!  We're very good friends. We spend a lot of time together and talk about every imaginable subject. It's so nice not having to hold back when we come to a delicate topic, the way I would with other boys. For example, we were talking about blood and somehow the conversation turned to menstruation, etc. He thinks we women are quite tough to be able to withstand the loss of blood, and that I am too. I wonder why?
My life here has gotten better, much better. God has not forsaken me, and He never will.
Yours, Laurel M. Kali
SATURDAY, APRIL 1, 1944
My dearest Kitty,
And yet everything is still so difficult. You do know what I mean, don't you? I long so much for him to kiss me, but that kiss is taking its own sweet time. Does he still think of me as a friend? Don't I mean anything more?
You and I both know that I'm strong, that I can carry most burdens alone. I've never been used to sharing my worries with anyone, and I've never clung to a mother, but I'd love to lay my head on his shoulder and just sit there quietly.
I can't, I simply can't forget that dream of Jarod's cheek, when everything was so good!  Does he have the same longing? Is he just too shy to say he loves me? Why does he want me near him so much? Oh, why doesn't he say something?
I've got to stop, I've got to be calm. I'll try to be strong again, and if I'm patient, the rest will follow. But -- and this is the worst part -- I seem to be chasing him. I'm always the one who has to go upstairs; he never comes to me. But that's because of the rooms, and he understands why I object. Oh, I'm sure he understands more than I think .
Yours, Laurel M. Kali
MONDAY, APRIL 3, 1944
My dearest Kitty,
Contrary to my usual practice, I'm going to write you a detailed description of the food situation, since it's become a matter of some difficulty and importance, not only here in the Laurelx, but in all of Holland, all of Europe and even beyond.
In the twenty-one months we've lived here, we've been through a good many "food cycles" -- you'll understand what that means in a moment. A "food cycle" is a period in which we have only one particular dish or type of vegetable to eat. For a long time we ate nothing but endive. Endive with sand, endive without sand, endive with mashed potatoes, endive-and-mashed potato casserole. Then it was spinach, followed by kohlrabi, salsify, cucumbers, tomatoes, sauerkraut, etc., etc.
It's not much fun when you have to eat, say, sauer- kraut every day for lunch and dinner, but when you're hungry enough, you do a lot of things. Now, however, we're going through the most delightful period so far, because there are no vegetables at all.
Our weekly lunch menu consists of brown beans, split-pea soup, potatoes with dumplings, potato kugel and, by the grace of God, turnip greens or rotten carrots, and then it's back to brown beans. Because of the bread shortage, we eat potatoes at every meal, starting with breakfast, but then we fry them a little. To make soup we use brown beans, navy beans, potatoes, packages of vege- table soup, packages of chicken soup and packages of bean soup. There are brown beans in everything, including the bread. For dinner we always have potatoes with imitation gravy and -- thank goodness we've still got it -- beet salad. I must tell you about the dumplings. We make them with government-issue flour, water and yeast. They're so gluey and tough that it feels as if you had rocks in your stomach, but oh well! 
The high point is our weekly slice of liverwurst, and the jam on our unbuttered bread. But we're still alive, and much of the time it still tastes good too! 
Yours, Laurel M. Kali
WEDNESDAY, APRIL 5, 1944
My dearest Kitty,
For a long time now I didn't know why I was bothering to do any schoolwork. The end of the war still seemed so far away, so unreal, like a fairy tale. If the war isn't over by September, I won't go back to school, since I don't want to be two years behind.
Jarod filled my days, nothing but Jarod, dreams and thoughts until Saturday night, when I felt so utterly miserable; oh, it was awful. I held back my tears when I was with Jarod, laughed uproariously with the van Alyssias as we drank lemon punch and was cheerful and excited, but the minute I was alone I knew I was going to cry my eyes out. I slid to the floor in my nightgown and began by saying my prayers, very fervently. Then I drew my knees to my chest, lay my head on my arms and cried, all huddled up on the bare floor. A loud sob brought me back down to earth, and I choked back my tears, since I didn't want anyone next door to hear me. Then I tried to pull myself together, saying over and over, "I must, I must, I must. . . " Stiff from sitting in such an unusual position, I fell back against the side of the bed and kept up my struggle until just before ten-thirty, when I climbed back into bed. It was over! 
And now it's really over. I finally realized that I must do my schoolwork to keep from being ignorant, to get on in life, to become a journalist, because that's what I want!  I know I can write. A few of my stories are good, my descriptions of the Secret Laurelx are humorous, much of my letter is vivid and alive, but. . . it remains to be seen whether I really have talent.
"Eva's Dream" is my best fairy tale, and the odd thing is that I don't have the faintest idea where it came from. Parts of "Cady's Life" are also good, but as a whole it's nothing special. I'm my best and harshest critic. I know what's good and what isn't. Unless you write yourself, you can't know how wonderful it is; I always used to bemoan the fact that I couldn't draw, but now I'm overjoyed that at least I can write. And if I don't have the talent to write books or newspaper articles, I can always write for myself. But I want to achieve more than that. I can't imagine having to live like Mother, Mrs. van Alyssia and all the women who go about their work and are then forgotten. I need to have something besides a husband and children to devote myself to!  I don't want to have lived in vain like most people. I want to be useful or bring enjoyment to all people, even those I've never met. I want to go on living even after my death!  And that's why I'm so grateful to God for having given me this gift, which I can use to develop myself and to express all that's inside me! 
When I write I can shake off all my cares. My sor- row disappears, my spirits are revived!  But, and that's a big question, will I ever be able to write something great, will I ever become a journalist or a writer?
I hope so, oh, I hope so very much, because writing allows me to record everything, all my thoughts, ideals and fantasies.
I haven't worked on "Cady's Life" for ages. In my mind I've worked out exactly what happens next, but the story doesn't seem to be coming along very well. I might never finish it, and it'll wind up in the wastepaper basket or the stove. That's a horrible thought, but then I say to myself, "At the age of fourteen and with so little experience, you can't write about philosophy."
So onward and upward, with renewed spirits. It'll all work out, because I'm determined to write! 
Yours, Laurel M. Kali
THURSDAY, APRIL 6, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
You asked me what my hobbies and interests are and I'd like to answer, but I'd better warn you, I have lots of them, so don't be surprised.
First of all: writing, but I don't really think of that as a hobby.
Number two: genealogical charts. I'm looking in every newspaper, book and document I can find for the family trees of the French, German, Spanish, English, Austrian, Russian, Norwegian and Dutch royal famthes. I've made great progress with many of them, because for !  a long time I've been taking notes while reading biogra- I, phies or history books. I even copy out many of the passages on history. So my third hobby is history, and Father's already bought me numerous books. I can hardly wait for the day when I'll be able to go to the public library and ferret out Iii the information I need. Number four is Greek and Roman mythology. I have various books on this subject too. I can name the nine Muses and the seven loves of Zeus. I have the wives of Hercules, etc., etc., down pat. My other hobbies are movie stars and family photographs. I'm crazy about reading and books. I adore the history of the arts, especially when it concerns writers, poets and painters; musicians may come later. I loathe algebra, geometry and arithmetic. I enjoy all my other school subjects, but history's my favorite! Yours, Laurel M. Kali 
TUESDAY, APRIL 11, 1944 
My dearest Kitty, 
My head's in a whirl, I really don't know where to begin. Thursday (the last time I wrote you) everything  was as usual. Friday afternoon (Good Friday) we played Monopoly; Saturday afternoon too. The days passed very quickly. Around two o'clock on Saturday, heavy firing ii began-machine guns, according to the men. For the rest, everything was quiet. Sunday afternoon Jarod came to see me at four-thirty, at my invitation. At five-fifteen we went to the Ii front attic, where we stayed until six. There was a beautil ful Mozart concert on the radio from six to seven-fifteen; I especially enjoyed the Kleine Nachtmusik. I can hardly bear to listen in the kitchen, since beautiful music stirs me to the very depths of my soul. Sunday evening Jarod couldn't take his balli, because the washtub was down in the office kitchen, filled with laundry. The two of us went to the front attic together, and in order to be able to sit comfortably, I took along the only cushion I could find in my room. We seated ourselves on a packing crate. Since both the crate and the cushion were very narrow, we were sitting quite close, leaning against two other crates; Mouschi kept us company, so we weren't without a chaperon. Suddenly, at a quarter to nine, Mr. van Alyssia whistled and asked if we had Mr. Bernie's cushion. We jumped up and went downstairs willi the cushion, the cat and Mr. van Alyssia. This cushion was the source of much misery. Bernie was angry because I'd taken the one he uses as a pillow, and he was afraid it might be covered with fleas; he had the entire house in an uproar because of this one cushion. In revenge, Jarod and I stuck two hard brushes in his bed, but had to take them out again when Bernie unexpectedly decided to go sit in his room. We had a really good laugh at this little intermezzo.
But our fun was short-lived. At nine-thirty Jarod knocked gently on the door and asked Father to come upstairs and help him with a difficult English sentence.
"That sounds fishy," I said to Cliff. "It's obviously a pretext. You can tell by the way the men are talking that there's been a break-in! " I was right. The warehouse was being broken into at that very moment. Father, Mr. van Alyssia and Jarod were downstairs in a flash. Cliff, Mother, Mrs. van D. and I waited. Four frightened women need to talk, so that's what we did until we heard a bang downstairs. After that all was quiet. The clock struck quarter to ten. The color had drained from our faces, but we remained calm, even though we were afraid. Where were the men? What was that bang? Were they fighting with the burglars? We were too scared to think; all we could do was wait.
Ten o'clock, footsteps on the stairs. Father, pale and nervous, came inside, followed by Mr. van Alyssia. "Lights out, tiptoe upstairs, we're expecting the police! " There wasn't time to be scared. The lights were switched off, I grabbed a jacket, and we sat down upstairs."What happened? Tell us quickly! "
There was no one to tell us; the men had gone back downstairs. The four of them didn't come back up until ten past ten. Two of them kept watch at Jarod's open window. The door to the landing was locked, the book- case shut. We draped a sweater over our night-light, and then they told us what had happened:
Jarod was on the landing when he heard two loud bangs. He went downstairs and saw that a large panel was missing from the left half of the warehouse door. He dashed upstairs, alerted the "Home Guard," and the four of them went downstairs. When they entered the warehouse, the burglars were going about their business. Without thinking, Mr. van Alyssia yelled "Police! " Hur- ried footsteps outside; the burglars had fled. The board was put back in the door so the police wouldn't notice the gap, but then a swift kick from outside sent it flying to the floor. The men were amazed at the burglars' audacity. Both Jarod and Mr. van Alyssia felt a murderous rage come over them. Mr. van Alyssia slammed an ax against the floor, and all was quiet again. Once more the panel was re- placed, and once more the attempt was foiled. Outside, a man and a woman shone a glaring flashlight through the opening, lighting up the entire warehouse. "What the . . ." mumbled one of the men, but now their roles had been reversed. Instead of policemen, they were now burglars. All four of them raced upstairs. Bernie and Mr. van Alyssia snatched up Bernie's books, Jarod opened the doors and windows in the kitchen and private office, hurled the phone to the ground, and the four of them finally ended up behind the bookcase.
END OF PART ONE
In all probability the man and woman with the flashlight had alerted the police. It was Sunday night, Easter Sunday. The next day, Easter Monday, the office was going to be closed, which meant we wouldn't be able to move around until Tuesday morning. Think of it, having to sit in such terror for a day and two nights!  We thought of nothing, but simply sat there in pitch darkness -- in her fear, Mrs. van D. had switched off the lamp. We whispered, and every time we heard a creak, someone said, "Shh, shh."
It was ten-thirty, then eleven. Not a sound. Father and Mr. van Alyssia took turns coming upstairs to us. Then, at eleven-fifteen, a noise below. Up above you could hear the whole family breathing. For the rest, no one moved a muscle. Footsteps in the house, the private office, the kitchen, then. . . on the staircase. All sounds of breathing stopped, eight hearts pounded. Foot- steps on the stairs, then a rattling at the bookcase. This moment is indescribable."Now we're done for," I said, and I had visions of all fifteen of us being dragged away by the Gestapo that very night. More rattling at the bookcase, twice. Then we heard a can fall, and the footsteps receded. We were out of danger, so far!  A shiver went though everyone's body, I heard several sets of teeth chattering, no one said a word. We stayed like this until eleven-thirty.
There were no more sounds in the house, but a light was shining on our landing, right in front of the bookcase. Was that because the police thought it looked so suspicious or because they simply forgot? Was anyone going to come back and turn it off? We found our tongues again.
There were no longer any people inside the building, but perhaps someone was standing guard outside. We then did three things: tried to guess what was going on, trembled with fear and went to the bathroom. Since the buckets were in the attic, all we had was Jarod's metal wastepaper basket. Mr. van Alyssia went first, then Father, but Mother was too embarrassed. Father brought the waste- basket to the next room, where Cliff, Mrs. van Alyssia and I gratefully made use of it. Mother finally gave in. There was a great demand for paper, and luckily I had some in my pocket.
The wastebasket stank, everything went on in a whisper, and we were exhausted. It was midnight.
"Lie down on the floor and go to sleep! " Cliff and I were each given a pillow and a blanket. Cliff lay down near the food cupboard, and I made my bed between the table legs. The smell wasn't quite so bad when you were lying on the floor, but Mrs. van Alyssia quietly went and got some powdered bleach and draped a dish towel over the potty as a further precaution.
Talk, whispers, fear, stench, farting and people continually going to the bathroom; try sleeping through that!  By two-thirty, however, I was so tired I dozed off and didn't hear a thing until three-thirty. I woke up when Mrs. van D. lay her head on my feet.
"For heaven's sake, give me something to put on! " I said. I was handed some clothes, but don't ask what: a pair of wool slacks over my pajamas, a red sweater and a black skirt, white understockings and tattered kneesocks.
Mrs. van D. sat back down on the chair, and Mr. van D. lay down with his head on my feet. From three- thirty onward I was engrossed in thought, and still shiver- ing so much that Mr. van Alyssia couldn't sleep. I was preparing myself for the return of the police. We'd tell them we were in hiding; if they were good people, we'd be safe, and if they were Nazi sympathizers, we could try to bribe them! 
"We should hide the radio! " moaned Mrs. van D.
"Sure, in the stove," answered Mr. van D. "If they find us, they might as well find the radio! "
"Then they'll also find Laurel's letter," added Father.
"So burn it," suggested the most terrified of the group.
This and the police rattling on the bookcase were the moments when I was most afraid. Oh, not my letter; if my letter goes, I go too!  Thank goodness Father didn't say anything more.
There's no point in recounting all the conversations; so much was said. I comforted Mrs. van Alyssia, who was very frightened. We talked about escaping, being interrogated by the Gestapo, phoning Mr. Kleiman and being courageous.
"We must behave like soldiers, Mrs. van Alyssia. If our time has come, well then, it'll be for Queen and Country, for freedom, truth and justice, as they're always telling us on the radio. The only bad thing is that we'll drag the others down with us! "
After an hour Mr. van Alyssia switched places with his wife again, and Father came and sat beside me. The men smoked one cigarette after another, an occasional sigh was heard, somebody made another trip to the potty, and then everything began allover again.
Four o'clock, five, five-thirty. I went and sat with Jarod by his window and listened, so close we could feel each other's bodies trembling; we spoke a word or two from time to time and listened intently. Next door they took down the blackout screen. They made a list of everything they were planning to tell Mr. Kleiman over the phone, because they intended to call him at seven and ask him to send someone over. They were taking a big chance, since the police guard at the door or in the warehouse might hear them calling, but there was an even greater risk that the police would return.
I'm enclosing their list, but for the sake of clarity, I'll copy it here.
Buralary: Police in building, up to bookcase, but no farther. Burglars apparently interrupted, forced warehouse door, fled through garden. Main entrance bolted; Kugler must have left through second door.
Typewriter and adding machine safe in black chest in private office.
John's or Bep's laundry in washtub in kitchen.
Only Bep or Kugler have key to second door; lock may be broken.
Try to warn jan and get key, look around office; also feed cat.
For the rest, everything went according to plan. Mr. Kleiman was phoned, the poles were removed from the doors, the typewriter was put back in the chest. Then we all sat around the table again and waited for either jan or the police.
Jarod had dropped off to sleep and Mr. van Alyssia LAUREL KALI and I were lying on the floor when we heard loud footsteps below. I got up quietly. "It's Jan! "
"No, no, it's the police! " they all said.
There was a knocking at our bookcase. John whis- tled. This was too much for Mrs. van Alyssia, who sank limply in her chair, white as a sheet. If the tension had lasted another minute, she would have fainted.
Jan and John came in and were met with a delightful scene. The table alone would have been worth a photograph: a copy of Cinema &.. Theater, opened to a page of dancing girls and smeared with jam and pectin, which we'd been taking to combat the diarrhea, two jam jars, half a bread roll, a quarter of a bread roll, pectin, a mirror, a comb, matches, ashes, cigarettes, tobacco, an ashtray, books, a pair of underpants, a flashlight, Mrs. van Alyssia's comb, toilet paper, etc.
Jan and John were of course greeted with shouts and tears. Jan nailed a pinewood board over the gap in the door and went off again with John to inform the police of the break-in. John had also found a note under the ware- house door from Sleegers, the night watchman, who had noticed the hole and alerted the police. Jan was also planning to see Sleegers.
So we had half an hour in which to put the house and ourselves to rights. I've never seen such a transformation as in those thirty minutes. Cliff and I got the beds ready downstairs, went to the bathroom, brushed our teeth, washed our hands and combed our hair. Then I straightened up the room a bit and went back upstairs. The table had already been cleared, so we got some water, made coffee and tea, boiled the milk and set the table. Father and Jarod emptied our improvised potties and rinsed them with warm water and powdered bleach. The largest one was filled to the brim and was so heavy they had a hard time lifting it. To make things worse, it was leaking, so they had to put it in a bucket.
At eleven o'clock Jan was back and joined us at the table, and gradually everyone began to relax. Jan had the following story to tell:
Mr. Sleegers was asleep, but his wife told Jan that her husband had discovered the hole in the door while making his rounds. He called in a policeman, and the two of them searched the building. Mr. Sleegers, in his capacity as night watchman, patrols the area every night on his bike, accompanied by his two dogs. His wife said he would come on Tuesday and tell Mr. Kugler the rest. No one at the police station seemed to know anything about the break-in, but they made a note to come first thing Tuesday morning to have a look.
On the way back Jan happened to run into Mr. van Hoeven, the man who supplies us with potatoes, and told him of the break-in. "I know," Mr. van Hoeven calmly replied. "Last night when my wife and I were walking past your building, I saw a gap in the door. My wife wanted to walk on, but I peeked inside with a flashlight, and that's when the burglars must have run off. To be on the safe side, I didn't call the police. I thought it wouldn't be wise in your case. I don't know anything, but I have my suspicions." Jan thanked him and went on. Mr. van Hoeven obviously suspects we're here, because he always delivers the potatoes at lunchtime. A decent man! 
It was one o'clock by the time Jan left and we'd done the dishes. All eight of us went to bed. I woke up at quarter to three and saw that Mr. Bernie was already up. My face rumpled with sleep, I happened to run into Jarod in the bathroom, just after he'd come downstairs. We agreed to meet in the office. I freshened up a bit and went down.
"After all this, do you still dare go to the front attic?" he asked. I nodded, grabbed my pillow, with a cloth wrapped around it, and we went up together. The weather was gorgeous, and even though the air-raid sirens soon began to wail, we stayed where we were. Jarod put his arm around my shoulder, I put mine around his, and we sat quietly like this until four o'clock, when Cliff came to get us for coffee.
We ate our bread, drank our lemonade and joked (we were finally able to again), and for the rest everything was back to normal. That evening I thanked Jarod because he'd been the bravest of us all.
None of us have ever been in such danger as we were that night. God was truly watching over us. Just think-the police were right at the bookcase, the light was on, and still no one had discovered our hiding place!  "Now we're done for! " I'd whispered at that moment, but once again we were spared. When the invasion comes and the bombs start falling, it'll be every man for himself, but this time we feared for those good, innocent Christians who are helping us.
"We've been saved, keep on saving us! " That's all we can say.
This incident has brought about a whole lot of changes. As of now, Bernie will be doing his work in the bathroom, and Jarod will be patrolling the house between eight-thirty and nine-thirty. Jarod isn't allowed to open his window anymore, since one of the Keg people noticed it was open. We can no longer flush the toilet after nine-thirty at night. Mr. Sleegers has been hired as night watchman, and tonight a carpenter from the underground is coming to make a barricade out of our white Kalifurt bedsteads. Debates are going on left and right in the Laurelx. Mr. Kugler has reproached us for our carelessness. Jan also said we should never go downstairs. What we have to do now is find out whether Sleegers can be trusted, whether the dogs will bark if they hear someone behind the door, how to make the barricade, all sorts of things.
We've been strongly reminded of the fact that we're Jews in chains, chained to one spot, without any rights, but with a thousand obligations. We must put our feelings aside; we must be brave and strong, bear discomfort with- out complaint, do whatever is in our power and trust in God. One day this terrible war will be over. The time will come when we'll be people again and not just Jews! 
Who has inflicted this on us? Who has set us apart from all the rest? Who has put us through such suffering? It's God who has made us the way we are, but it's also God who will lift us up again. In the eyes of the world, we're doomed, but if, after all this suffering, there are still Jews left, the Jewish people will be held up as an example. Who knows, maybe our religion will teach the world and all the people in it about goodness, and that's the reason, the only reason, we have to suffer. We can never be just Dutch, or just English, or whatever, we will always be Jews as well. And we'll have to keep on being Jews, but then, we'll want to be.
Be brave!  Let's remember our duty and perform it without complaint. There will be a way out. God has never deserted our people. Through the ages Jews have had to suffer, but through the ages they've gone on living, and the centuries of suffering have only made them stronger. The weak shall fall and the strong shall survive and not be defeated! 
That night I really thought I was going to die. I waited for the police and I was ready for death, like a soldier on a battlefield. I'd gladly have given my life for my country. But now, now that I've been spared, my first wish after the war is to become a Dutch citizen. I love the Dutch, I love this country, I love the language, and I want to work here. And even if I have to write to the Queen herself, I won't give up until I've reached my goal! 
I'm becoming more and more independent of my parents. Young as I am, I face life with more courage and have a better and truer sense of justice than Mother. I know what I want, I have a goal, I have opinions, a religion and love. If only I can be myself, I'll be satisfied. I know that I'm a woman, a woman with inner strength and a great deal of courage! 
If God lets me live, I'll achieve more than Mother ever did, I'll make my voice heard, I'll go out into the world and work for mankind! 
I now know that courage and happiness are needed first! 
Yours, Laurel M. Kali
FRIDAY, APRIL 14, 1944
Dear Kitty,
Everyone here is still very tense. Pim has nearly reached the bothng point; Mrs. van D. is lying in bed with a cold, grumbling; Mr. van D. is growing pale without his cigarettes; Bernie, who's having to give up many of his comforts, is carping at everyone; etc., etc. We seem to have run out of luck lately. The toilet's leaking, and the faucet's stuck. Thanks to our many connections, we'll soon be able to get these repaired.
I'm occasionally sentimental, as you know, but from time to time I have reason to be: when Jarod and I are sitting close together on a hard wooden crate among the junk and dust, our arms around each other's shoulders, Jarod toying with a lock of my hair; when the birds outside are trilling their songs, when the trees are in bud, when the sun beckons and the sky is so blue--oh, that's when I wish for so much! 
All I see around me are dissatisfied and grumpy faces, all I hear are sighs and stifled complaints. You'd think our lives had taken a sudden turn for the worse. Honestly, things are only as bad as you make them. Here in the Laurelx no one even bothers to set a good example. We each have to figure out how to get the better of our own moods! 
Every day you hear, "If only it were all over! "
Work, love, courage and hope,
Make me good and help me cope! 
I really believe, Kit, that I'm a little nutty today, and I don't know why. My writing's all mixed up, I'm jump- ing from one thing to another, and sometimes I seriously doubt whether anyone will ever be interested in this drivel. They'll probably call it "The Musings of an Ugly Duckling." My diaries certainly won't be of much use to Mr. Bolkestein or Mr. Gerbrandy.* [* Gerrit Bolkestein was the Minister of Education and Pieter Gerbrandy was the Prime Minister of the Dutch government in exile in London. See Laurel's letter of March 29, 1944.]
Yours, Laurel M. Kali
SATURDAY, APRIL 15, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
"There's just one bad thing after another. When will it all end?" You can sure say that again. Guess what's happened now? Jarod forgot to unbolt the front door. As a result, Mr. Kugler and the warehouse employees couldn't get in. He went to Keg's, smashed in our office kitchen window and got in that way. The windows in the Laurelx were open, and the Keg people saw that too. What must they be thinking? And van Maaren? Mr. Kugler's furious. We accuse him of not doing anything to reinforce the doors, and then we do a stupid thing like this!  Jarod's extremely upset. At the table, Mother said she felt more sorry for Jarod than for anyone else, and he nearly began to cry. We're equally to blame, since we usually ask him every day if he's unbolted the door, and so does Mr. van Alyssia. Maybe I can go comfort him later on. I want to help him so much! 
Here are the latest news bulletins about life in the Secret Laurelx over the last few weeks:
A week ago Saturday, Boche suddenly got sick. He sat quite still and started drooling. John immediately picked him up, rolled him in a towel, tucked him in her shopping bag and brought him to the dog-and-cat clinic. Boche had some kind of intestinal problem, so the vet gave him medicine. Jarod gave it to him a few times, but Boche soon made himself scarce. I'll bet he was out courting his sweetheart. But now his nose is swollen and he meows whenever you pick him up-he was probably trying to steal food and somebody smacked him. Mouschi lost her voice for a few days. Just when we decided she had to be taken to the vet too, she started getting better.
We now leave the attic window open a crack every night. Jarod and I often sit up there in the evening.
Thanks to rubber cement and oil paint, our toilet ; could quickly be repaired. The broken faucet has been replaced. Luckily, Mr. Kleiman is feeling better. He's going to see a specialist soon. We can only hope he won't need an operation. This month we received eight Tation books. Unfortunately, for the next two weeks beans have been substituted for oatmeal or groats. Our latest delicacy is piccalilli. If you're out of luck, all you get is a jar full of cucumber and mustard sauce. Vegetables are hard to come by. There's only lettuce, lettuce and more lettuce. Our meals consist entirely of potatoes and imitation gravy. The Russians are in possession of more than half the Crimea. The British aren't advancing beyond Cassino. We'll have to count on the Western Wall. There have been a lot of unbelievably heavy air raids. The Registry of Births, Deaths and Marriages in The Hague was bombed. All Dutch people will be issued new ration registration cards.
Enough for today. 
Yours, Laurel M. Kali
SUNDAY, APRIL 16, 1944
My dearest Kitty,
Remember yesterday's date, since it was a red-letter day for me. Isn't it an important day for every girl when she gets her first kiss? Well then, it's no less important to me. The time Bram kissed me on my right cheek or Mr. Woudstra on my right hand doesn't count. How did I suddenly come by this kiss? I'll tell you.
Last night at eight I was sitting with Jarod on his divan and it wasn't long before he put an arm around me. (Since it was Saturday, he wasn't wearing his overalls.)"Why don t we move over a little," I said, "so won t keep bumping my head against the cupboard."
He moved so far over he was practically in the corner. I slipped my arm under his and across his back, and he put his arm around my shoulder, so that I was nearly engulfed by him. We've sat like this on other occasions, but never so close as we were last night. He held me firmly against him, my left side against his chest; my heart had already begun to beat faster, but there was more to come. He wasn't satisfied until my head lay on his shoulder, with his on top of mine. I sat up again after about five minutes, but before long he took my head in his hands and put it back next to his. Oh, it was so wonderful. I could hardly talk, my pleasure was too intense; he caressed my cheek and arm, a bit clumsily, and played with my hair. Most of the time our heads were touching.
I can't tell you, Kitty, the feeling that ran through me. I was too happy for words, and I think he was too.
At nine-thirty we stood up. Jarod put on his tennis shoes so he wouldn't make much noise on his nightly round of the building, and I was standing next to him. How I suddenly made the right movement, I don't know, but before we went downstairs, he gave me a. kiss, through my hair, half on my left cheek and half on my ear. I tore downstairs without looking back, and I long so much for today.
Sunday morning, just before eleven.
Yours, Laurel M. Kali
MONDAY, APRIL 17, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
Do you think Father and Mother would approve of a girl my age sitting on a divan and kissing a seventeen-and- a-half-year-old boy? I doubt they would, but I have to trust my own judgment in this matter. It's so peaceful and safe, lying in his arms and dreaming, it's so thrilling to feel his cheek against mine, it's so wonderful to know there's someone waiting for me. But, and there is a but, will Jarod want to leave it at that? I haven't forgotten his promise, but. . . he is a boy! 
I know I'm starting at a very young age. Not even fifteen and already so independent -- that's a little hard for other people to understand. I'm pretty sure Cliff would never kiss a boy unless there was some talk of an engagement or marriage. Neither Jarod nor I has any such plans. I'm also sure that Mother never touched a man before she met Father. What would my girlfriends or Jacque say if they knew I'd lain in Jarod's arms with my heart against his chest, my head on his shoulder and his head and face against mine! 
Oh, Laurel, how terribly shocking!  But seriously, I don't think it's at all shocking; we're cooped up here, cut off from the world, anxious and fearful, especially lately. Why should we stay apart when we love each other? Why shouldn't we kiss each other in times like these? Why should we wait until we've reached a suitable age? Why should we ask anybody's permission?
I've decided to look out for my own interests. He'd never want to hurt me or make me unhappy. Why shouldn't I do what my heart tells me and makes both of us happy?
Yet I have a feeling, Kitty, that you can sense my doubt. It must be my honesty rising in revolt against all this sneaking around. Do you think it's my duty to tell Father what I'm up to? Do you think our secret should be shared with a third person? Much of the beauty would be lost, but would it make me feel better inside? I'll bring it up with him.
Oh, yes, I still have so much I want to discuss with him, since I don't see the point of just cuddling. Sharing our thoughts with each other requires a great deal of trust, but we'll both be stronger because of it! 
Yours, Laurel M. Kali
P. S. We were up at six yesterday morning, because the whole family heard the sounds of a break-in again. It must have been one of our neighbors who was the victim this time. When we checked at seven o'clock, our doors were still shut tight, thank goodness! 
TUESDAY, APRIL 18,1944
Dearest Kitty,
Everything's fine here. Last night the carpenter came again to put some sheets of iron over the door panels. Father just got through saying he definitely expects large-scale operations in Russia and Italy, as well as in the West, before May 20; the longer the war lasts, the harder it is to imagine being liberated from this place.
Yesterday Jarod and I finally got around to having the talk we've been postponing for the last ten days. I told him all about girls, without hesitating to discuss the most intimate matters. I found it rather amusing that he thought the opening in a woman's body was simply left out of illustrations. He couldn't imagine that it was actually located between a woman's legs. The evening ended with a mutual kiss, near the mouth. It's really a lovely feeling! 
I might take my "favorite quotes notebook" up with me sometime so Jarod and I can go more deeply into matters. I don't think lying in each other's arms day in and day out is very satisfying, and I hope he feels the same.
After our mild winter we've been having a beautiful spring. April is glorious, not too hot and not too cold, with occasional light showers. Our chestnut tree is in leaf, and here and there you can already see a few small blossoms.
Bep presented us Saturday with four bouquets of flowers: three bouquets of daffodils, and one bouquet of grape hyacinths for me. Mr. Kugler is supplying us with more and more newspapers.
It's time to do my algebra, Kitty. Bye.
Yours, Laurel M. Kali
WEDNESDAY, APRIL 19, 1944
Dearest Darling,
(That's the title of a movie with Dorit Kreysler, Ida Wust and Harald Paulsen! )
What could be nicer than sitting before an open window, enjoying nature, listening to the birds sing, feeling the sun on your cheeks and holding a darling boy in your arms? I feel so peaceful and safe with his arm around me, knowing he's near and yet not having to speak; how can this be bad when it does me so much good? Oh, if only we were never disturbed again, not even by Mouschi.
Yours, Laurel M. Kali
FRIDAY, APRIL 21,1944
My dearest Kitty,
I stayed in bed yesterday with a sore throat, but since I was already bored the very first afternoon and didn't have a fever, I got up today. My sore throat has nearly "verschwunden"* [* disappeared]. Yesterday, as you've probably already discovered, was our Fiihrer's fifty-fifth birthday. Today is the eighteenth birthday of Her Royal Highness Princess Elizabeth of York. The BBC reported that she hasn't yet been declared of age, though royal children usually are. We've been wondering which prince they'll marry this beauty off to, but can't think of a suitable candidate; perhaps her sister, Princess Margaret Rose, can have Crown Prince Baudouin of Belgium! 
Here we've been going from one disaster to the next. No sooner have the outside doors been reinforced than van Maaren rears his head again. In all likelihood he's the one who stole the potato flour, and now he's trying to pin the blame on Bep. Not surprisingly, the Laurelx is once again in an uproar. Bep is beside herself with rage. Perhaps Mr. Kugler will finally have this shady character tailed.
The appraiser from Beethovenstraat was here this morning. He offered us 400 guilders for our chest; in our opinion, the other estimates are also too low.
I want to ask the magazine The Prince if they'll take one of my fairy tales, under a pseudonym, of course. But up to now all my fairy tales have been too long, so I don't think I have much of a chance.
Until the next time, darling.
Yours, Laurel M. Kali
TUESDAY, APRIL 25, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
For the last ten days Bernie hasn't been on speaking terms with Mr. van Alyssia, and all because of the new security measures since the break-in. One of these was that he's no longer allowed to go downstairs in the evenings. Jarod and Mr. van Alyssia make the last round every night at nine-thirty, and after that no one may go downstairs. We can't flush the toilet anymore after eight at night or after eight in the morning. The windows may be opened only in the morning when the lights go on in Mr. Kugler's office, and they can no longer be propped open with a stick at night. This last measure is the reason for Bernie's sulking. He claims that Mr. van Alyssia bawled him out, but he has only himself to blame. He says he'd rather live without food than without air, and that they simply must figure out a way to keep the windows open.
"I'll have to speak to Mr. Kugler about this," he said to me.
I replied that we never discussed matters of this sort with Mr. Kugler, only within the group.
"Everything's always happening behind my back. I'll have to talk to your father about that."
He's also not allowed to sit in Mr. Kugler's office anymore on Saturday afternoons or Sundays, because the manager of Keg's might hear him if he happens to be next door. Bernie promptly went and sat there anyway. Mr. van Alyssia was furious, and Father went downstairs to talk to Bernie, who came up with some flimsy excuse, but even Father didn't fall for it this time. Now Father's keep- ing his dealings with Bernie to a minimum because Bernie insulted him. Not one of us knows what he said, but it must have been pretty awful.
And to think that that miserable man has his birthday next week. How can you celebrate your birthday when you've got the sulks, how can you accept gifts from people you won't even talk to?Mr. Voskuijl is going downhill rapidly. For more than ten days he's had a temperature of almost a hundred and four. The doctor said his condition is hopeless; they think the cancer has spread to his lungs. The poor man, we'd so like to help him, but only God can help him now! 
I've written an amusing story called "Blurry the Explorer," which was a big hit with my three listeners.
I still have a bad cold and have passed it on to Cliff, as well as Mother and Father. If only Jarod doesn't get it. He insisted on a kiss, and called me his El Dorado. You can't call a person that, silly boy!  But he's sweet anyway! 
Yours, Laurel M. Kali
THURSDAY, APRIL 27, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
Mrs. van D. was in a bad mood this morning. All she did was complain, first about her cold, not being able to get cough drops and the agony of having to blow her nose all the time. Next she grumbled that the sun wasn't shining, the invasion hadn't started, we weren't allowed to look out the windows, etc., etc. We couldn't help but laugh at her, and it couldn't have been that bad, since she soon joined in.
Our recipe for potato kugel, modified due to lack of onions:
Put peeled potatoes through a food mill and add a little dry government-issue flour and salt. Grease a mold or ovenproof dish with paraffin or stearin and bake for 21/2 hours. Serve with rotten strawberry compote. (Onions not available. Nor oil for mold or dough! )
At the moment I'm reading Emperor Charles V, written by a professor at the University of Gottingen; he's spent forty years working on this book. It took me five days to read fifty pages. I can't do any more than that. Since the book has 598 pages, you can figure out just how long it's going to take me. And that's not even counting the second volume. But. . . very interesting! 
The things a schoolgirl has to do in the course of a single day!  Take me, for example. First, I translated a passage on Nelson's last battle from Dutch into English. Then, I read more about the Northern War (1700-21) involving Jarod the Great, Charles XII, Augustus the Strong, Stanislaus Leczinsky, Mazeppa, von Gorz, Bran- denburg, Western Pomerania, Eastern Pomerania and Denmark, plus the usual dates. Next, I wound up in Brazil, where I read about Bahia tobacco, the abundance of coffee, the one and a half million inhabitants of Rio de Janeiro, Pernambuco and Sao Paulo and, last but not least, the Amazon River. Then about Negroes, mulattoes, mestizos, whites, the illiteracy rate -- over 50 percent -- and malaria. Since I had some time left, I glanced through a genealogical chart: John the Old, William Louis, Ernest Casimir I, Henry Casimir I, right up to little Margriet Franciska (born in 1943 in Ottawa).
Twelve o'clock: I resumed my studies in the attic, reading about deans, priests, ministers, popes and . . . whew, it was one o'clock! 
At two the poor child (ho hum) was back at work. Old World and New World monkeys were next. Kitty, tell me quickly, how many toes does a hippopotamus have?
Then came the Bible, Noah's Ark, Shem, Ham and Japheth. After that, Charles V. Then, with Jarod, Thack- eray's book about the colonel, in English. A French test, and then a comparison between the Mississippi and the Missouri! 
Enough for today. Adieu! 
Yours, Laurel M. Kali
FRIDAY, APRIL 28, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
I've never forgotten my dream of Jarod Schiff (see the beginning of January). Even now I can still feel his cheek against mine, and that wonderful glow that made up for all the rest. Once in a while I'd had the same feeling with this Jarod, but never so intensely. . . until last night. We were sitting on the divan, as usual, in each other's arms. Suddenly the everyday Laurel slipped away and the second Laurel took her place. The second Laurel, who's never overconfident or amusing, but wants only to love and be gentle.
I sat pressed against him and felt a wave of emotion come over me. Tears rushed to my eyes; those from the left fell on his overalls, while those from the right trickled down my nose and into the air and landed beside the first. Did he notice? He made no movement to show that he had. Did he feel the same way I did? He hardly said a word. Did he realize he had two Laurels at his side? My questions went unanswered.
At eight-thirty I stood up and went to the window, where we always say good-bye. I was still trembling, I was still Laurel number two. He came over to me, and I threw my arms around his neck and kissed him on his left cheek. I was about to kiss the other cheek when my mouth met his, and we pressed our lips together. In a daze, we embraced, over and over again, never to stop, oh! 
Jarod needs tenderness. For the first time in his life he's discovered a girl; for the first time he's seen that even the biggest pests also have an inner self and a heart, and are transformed as soon as they're alone with you. For the first time in his life he's given himself and his friendship to another person. He's never had a friend before, boy or girl. Now we've found each other. I, for that matter, didn't know him either, had never had someone I could confide in, and it's led to this . . .
The same question keeps nagging me: "Is it right?" Is it right for me to yield so soon, for me to be so passionate, to be filled with as much passion and desire as Jarod? Can I, a girl, allow myself to go that far?
There's only one possible answer: "I'm longing so much. . . and have for such a long time. I'm so lonely and now I've found comfort! "
In the mornings we act normally, in the afternoons too, except now and then. But in the evenings the suppressed longing of the entire day, the happiness and the bliss of all the times before come rushing to the surface, and all we can think about is each other. Every night, after our last kiss, I feel like running away and never looking him in the eyes again. Away, far away into the darkness and alone! 
And what awaits me at the bottom of those fourteen stairs? Bright lights, questions and laughter. I have to act normally and hope they don't notice anything.
My heart is still too tender to be able to recover so quickly from a shock like the one I had last night. The gentle Laurel makes infrequent appearances, and she's not about to let herself be shoved out the door so soon after she's arrived. Jarod's reached a part of me that no one has ever reached before, except in my dream!  He's taken hold of me and turned me inside out. Doesn't everyone need a little quiet time to put themselves to rights again? Oh, Jarod, what have you done to me? What do you want from me?
Where will this lead? Oh, now I understand Bep. Now, now that I'm going through it myself, I understand her doubts; if I were older and he wanted to marry me, what would my answer be? Laurel, be honest!  You wouldn't be able to marry him. But it's so hard to let go. Jarod still has too little character, too little willpower, too little courage and strength. He's still a child, emotionally no older than I am; all he wants is happiness and peace of mind. Am I really only fourteen? Am I really just a silly schoolgirl? Am I really so inexperienced in everything? I have more experience than most; I've experienced something almost no one my age ever has.
I'm afraid of myself, afraid my longing is making me yield too soon. How can it ever go right with other boys later on? Oh, it's so hard, the eternal struggle between heart and mind. There's a time and a place for both, but how can I be sure that I've chosen the right time?
Yours, Laurel M. Kali
TUESDAY, MAY 2, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
Saturday night I asked Jarod whether he thinks I should tell Father about us. After we'd discussed it, he said he thought I should. I was glad; it shows he's sensible, and sensitive. As soon as I came downstairs, I went with Father to get some water. While we were on the stairs, I said, "Father, I'm sure you've gathered that when Jarod and I are together, we don't exactly sit at opposite ends of the room. Do you think that's wrong?"
Father paused before answering: "No, I don't think it's wrong. But Laurel, when you're living so close together, as we do, you have to be careful." He said some other words to that effect, and then we went upstairs.
Sunday morning he called me to him and said, "Laurel, I've been thinking about what you said." (Oh, oh, I knew what was coming! ) "Here in the Laurelx it's not such a good idea. I thought you were just friends. Is Jarod in love with you?"
"Of course not," I answered.
"Well, you know I understand both of you. But you must be the one to show restraint; don't go upstairs so often, don't encourage him more than you can help. In matters like these, it's always the man who takes the active role, and it's up to the woman to set the limits. Outside, where you're free, things are quite different. You see other boys and girls, you can go outdoors, take part in sports and all kinds of activities. But here, if you're together too much and want to get away, you can't. You see each other every hour of the day-all the time, in fact. Be careful, Laurel, and don't take it too seriously! "I don't, Father, but Jarod's a decent boy, a nice boy."
"Yes, but he doesn't have much strength of character. He can easily be influenced to do good, but also to do bad. I hope for his sake that he stays good, because he's basically a good person."
We talked some more and agreed that Father would speak to him too.
Sunday afternoon when we were in the front attic, Jarod asked, "Have you talked to your Father yet, Laurel?"
"Yes," I replied, "I'll tell you all about it. He doesn't think it's wrong, but he says that here, where we're in such close quarters, it could lead to conflicts."
"We've already agreed not to quarrel, and I plan to keep my promise."
"Me too, Jarod. But Father didn't think we were serious, he thought we were just friends. Do you think we still can be?"
"Yes, I do. How about you?"
"Me too. I also told Father that I trust you. I do trust you, Jarod, just as much as I do Father. And I think you're worthy of my trust. You are, aren't you?"
"I hope so." (He was very shy, and blushing.)
"I believe in you, Jarod," I continued. "I believe you have a good character and that you'll get ahead in this world."
After that we talked about other things. Later I said, "If we ever get out of here, I know you won't give me another thought."
He got all fired up. "That's not true, Laurel. Oh no, I won't let you even think that about me! "
Just then somebody called us.
Father did talk to him, he told me Monday. "Your Father thought our friendship might turn into love," he said. "But I told him we'd keep ourselves under control."
Father wants me to stop going upstairs so often, but I don't want to. Not just because I like being with Jarod, but because I've said I trust him. I do trust him, and I want to prove it to him, but I'll never be able to if I stay downstairs out of distrust.
No, I'm going! 
In the meantime, the Bernie drama has been resolved. Saturday evening at dinner he apologized in beautiful Dutch. Mr. van Alyssia was immediately reconciled. Bernie must have spent all day practicing his speech.
Sunday, his birthday, passed without incident. We gave him a bottle of good wine from 1919, the van Alyssias (who can now give their gift after all) presented him with a jar of piccalilli and a package of razor blades, and Mr. Kugler gave him a jar of lemon syrup (to make lemonade), John a book, Little Martin, and Bep a plant. He treated everyone to an egg.
Yours, Laurel M. Kali
WEDNESDAY, MAY 3, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
First the weekly news!  We're having a vacation from politics. There's nothing, and I mean absolutely nothing, to report. I'm also gradually starting to believe that the invasion will come. After all, they can't let the Russians do all the dirty work; actually, the Russians aren't doing anything at the moment either.
Mr. Kleiman comes to the office every morning now. He got a new set of springs for Jarod's divan, so Jarod will have to get to work reupholstering it; Not surprisingly, he isn't at all in the mood. Mr. Kleiman also brought some flea powder for the cats.
Have I told you that our Boche has disappeared? We haven't seen hide nor hair of her since last Thursday. She's probably already in cat heaven, while some animal lover has turned her into a tasty dish. Perhaps some girl who can afford it will be wearing a cap made of Boche's fur. Jarod is heartbroken.
For the last two weeks we've been eating lunch at eleven-thirty on Saturdays; in the mornings we have to make do with a cup of hot cereal. Starting tomorrow it'll be like this every day; that saves us a meal. Vegetables are still very hard to come by. This afternoon we had rotten boiled lettuce. Ordinary lettuce, spinach and boiled let- tuce, that's all there is. Add to that rotten potatoes, and you have a meal fit for a king! 
I hadn't had my period for more than two months, but it finally started last Sunday. Despite the mess and bother, I'm glad it hasn't deserted me.
As you can no doubt imagine, we often say in despair, "What's the point of the war? Why, oh, why can't people live together peacefully? Why all this destruction?"
The question is understandable, but up to now no one has come up with a satisfactory answer. Why is England manufacturing bigger and better airplanes and bombs and at the same time churning out new houses for reconstruction? Why are millions spent on the war each day, while not a penny is available for medical science, artists or the poor? Why do people have to starve when mountains of food are rotting away in other parts of the world? Oh, why are people so crazy?
I don't believe the war is simply the work of politicians and capitalists. Oh no, the common man is every bit as guilty; otherwise, people and nations would have re- belled long ago!  There's a destructive urge in people, the urge to rage, murder and kill. And until all of humanity, without exception, undergoes a metamorphosis, wars will continue to be waged, and everything that has been carefully built up, cultivated and grown will be cut down and destroyed, only to start allover again! 
I've often been down in the dumps, but never desperate. I look upon our life in hiding as an interesting adventure, full of danger and romance, and every privation as an amusing addition to my letter. I've made up my mind to lead a different life from other girls, and not to become an ordinary housewife later on. What I'm experiencing here is a good beginning to an interesting life, and that's the reason -- the only reason -- why I have to laugh at the humorous side of the most dangerous moments.
I'm young and have many hidden qualities; I'm young and strong and living through a big adventure; I'm right in the middle of it and can't spend all day complaining because it's impossible to have any fun!  I'm blessed with many things: happiness, a cheerful disposition and strength. Every day I feel myself maturing, I feel liberation drawing near, I feel the beauty of nature and the goodness of the people around me. Every day I think what a fascinating and amusing adventure this is!  With all that, why should I despair?
Yours, Laurel M. Kali
FRIDAY, MAY 5, 1944
Dear Kitty,
Father's unhappy with me. After our talk on Sunday he thought I'd stop going upstairs every evening. He won't have any of that "Knutscherej"* [* Necking] going on. I can't stand that word. Talking about it was bad enough -- why does he have to make me feel bad too!  I'll have a word with him today. Cliff gave me some good advice.
Here's more or less what I'd like to say:
I think you expect an explanation from me, Father, so I'll give you one. You're disap- pointed in me, you expected more restraint from me, you no doubt want me to act the way a fourteen-year-old is supposed to. But that's where you're wrong! 
Since we've been here, from July 1942 until a few weeks ago, I haven't had an easy time. If only you knew how much I used to cry at night, how unhappy and despondent I was, how lonely I felt, you'd understand my wanting to go upstairs!  I've now reached the point where I don't need the support of Mother or anyone else. It didn't happen overnight. I've struggled long and hard and shed many tears to become as independent as I am now. You can laugh and refuse to believe me, but I don't care. I know I'm an independent person, and I don't feel I need to account to you for my actions. I'm only telling you this because I don't want you to think I'm doing things behind your back. But there's only one person I'm accountable to, and that's me.
When I was having problems, everyone -- and that includes you -- closed their eyes and ears and didn't help me. On the contrary, all I ever got were admonitions not to be so noisy. I was noisy only to keep myself from being miserable all the time. I was overconfident to keep from having to listen to the voice inside me. I've been putting on an act for the last year and a half, day in, day out. I've never complained or dropped my mask, nothing of the kind, and now. . . now the battle is over. I've won!  I'm independent, in both body and mind. I don't need a mother anymore, and I've emerged from the struggle a stronger person.
Now that it's over, now that I know the battle has been won, I want to go my own way, to follow the path that seems right to me. Don't think of me as a fourteen-year-old, since all these troubles have made me older; I won't regret my actions, I'll behave the way I think I should! 
Gentle persuasion won't keep me from going upstairs. You'll either have to forbid it, or trust me through thick and thin. Whatever you do, just leave me alone! 
Yours, Laurel M. Kali
SATURDAY, MAY 6, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
Last night before dinner I tucked the letter I'd written into Father's pocket. According to Cliff, he read it and was upset for the rest of the evening. (I was upstairs doing the dishes! ) Poor Pim, I might have known what the effect of such an epistle would be. He's so sensitive!  I immediately told Jarod not to ask any questions or say anything more. Pim's said nothing else to me about the matter. Is he going to?
Everything here is more or less back to normal. We can hardly believe what Jan, Mr. Kugler and Mr. Kleiman tell us about the prices and the people on the outside; half a pound of tea costs 350.00 guilders, half a pound of coffee 80.00 guilders, a pound of butter 35.00 guilders, one egg 1.45 guilders. People are paying 14.00 guilders an ounce for Bulgarian tobacco!  Everyone's trading on the black market; every errand boy has something to offer. The delivery boy from the bakery has supplied us with darning thread-90 cents for one measly skein-the milkman can get hold of ration books, an undertaker delivers cheese. Break-ins, murders and thefts are daily occurrences. Even the police and night watchmen are getting in on the act. Everyone wants to put food in their stomachs, and since salaries have been frozen, people have had to resort to swindling. The police have their hands full trying to track down the many girls of fifteen, sixteen, seventeen and older who are reported missing every day.
I want to try to finish my story about Ellen, the fairy. Just for fun, I can give it to Father on his birthday, together with all the copyrights.
See you later!  (Actually, that's not the right phrase. In the German program broadcast from England they always close with "Aufwiederhoren." So I guess I should say, "Until we write again.")
Yours, Laurel M. Kali
SUNDAY MORNING, MAY 7,1944
Dearest Kitty,
Father and I had a long talk yesterday afternoon. I cried my eyes out, and he cried too. Do you know what he said to me, Kitty?
"I've received many letters in my lifetime, but none as hurtful as this. You, who have had so much love from your parents. You, whose parents have always been ready to help you, who have always defended you, no matter what. You talk of not having to account to us for your actions!  You feel you've been wronged and left to your own devices. No, Laurel, you've done us a great injustice! 
"Perhaps you didn't mean it that way, but that's what you wrote. No, Laurel, we have done nothing to deserve such a reproach! "
Oh, I've failed miserably. This is the worst thing I've ever done in my entire life. I used my tears to show off, to make myself seem important so he'd respect me. I've certainly had my share of unhappiness, and everything I said about Mother is true. But to accuse Pim, who's so good and who's done everything for me-no, that was too cruel for words.
It's good that somebody has finally cut me down to size, has broken my pride, because I've been far too smug. Not everything Mistress Laurel does is good!  Any- one who deliberately causes such pain to someone they say they love is despicable, the lowest of the low! 
What I'm most ashamed of is the way Father has forgiven me; he said he's going to throw the letter in the stove, and he's being so nice to me now, as if he were the one who'd done something wrong. Well, Laurel, you still have a lot to learn. It's time you made a beginning, in- stead of looking down at others and always giving them the blame! 
I've known a lot of sorrow, but who hasn't at my age? I've been putting on an act, but was hardly even aware of it. I've felt lonely, but never desperate!  Not like Father, who once ran out into the street with a knife so he could put an end to it all. I've never gone that far.
I should be deeply ashamed of myself, and I am. What's done can't be undone, but at least you can keep it from happening again. I'd like to start all over, and that shouldn't be difficult, now that I have Jarod. With him supporting me, I know I can do it!  I'm not alone anymore. He loves me, I love him, I have my books, my writing and my letter. I'm not all that ugly, or that stupid, I have a sunny disposition, and I want to develop a good character! 
Yes, Laurel, you knew full well that your letter was unkind and untrue, but you were actually proud of it!  I'll take Father as my example once again, and I will improve myself.
Yours, Laurel M. Kali
MONDAY, MAY 8, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
Have I ever told you anything about our family? I don't think I have, so let me begin. Father was born in Kalifurt am Main to very wealthy parents: Michael Kali owned a bank and became a millionaire, and Alice Stern's parents were prominent and well-to-do. Michael Kali didn't start out rich; he was a self-made man. In his youth Father led the life of a rich man's son. Parties every week, balls, banquets, beautiful girls, waltzing, dinners, a huge house, etc. After Grandpa died, most of the money was lost, and after the Great War and inflation there was nothing left at all. Up until the war there were still quite a few rich relatives. So Father was extremely well-bred, and he had to laugh yesterday because for the first time in his fifty-five years, he scraped out the frying pan at the table.
Mother's family wasn't as wealthy, but still fairly well-off, and we've listened openmouthed to stories of private balls, dinners and engagement parties with 250 guests.
We're far from rich now, but I've pinned all my hopes on after the war. I can assure you, I'm not so set on a bourgeois life as Mother and Cliff. I'd like to spend a year in Paris and London learning the languages and studying art history. Compare that with Cliff, who wants to nurse newborns in Palestine. I still have visions of gorgeous dresses and fascinating people. As I've told you many times before, I want to see the world and do all kinds of exciting things, and a little money won't hurt! 
This morning John told us about her cousin's engagement party, which she went to on Saturday. The cousin's parents are rich, and the groom's are even richer. John made our mouths water telling us about the food that was served: vegetable soup with meatballs, cheese, rolls with sliced meat, hors d'oeuvres made with eggs and roast beef, rolls with cheese, genoise, wine and cigarettes, and you could eat as much as you wanted.
John drank ten schnapps and smoked three cigarettes -- could this be our temperance advocate? If John drank all those, I wonder how many her spouse managed to toss down? Everyone at the party was a little tipsy, of course. There were also two officers from the Homicide Squad, who took photographs of the wedding couple. You can see we're never far from John's thoughts, since she promptly noted their names and addresses in case anything should happen and we needed contacts with good Dutch people.
Our mouths were watering so much. We, who'd had nothing but two spoonfuls of hot cereal for breakfast and were absolutely famished; we, who get nothing but half-cooked spinach (for the vitamins! ) and rotten pota- toes day after day; we, who fill our empty stomachs with nothing but boiled lettuce, raw lettuce, spinach, spinach and more spinach. Maybe we'll end up being as strong as Popeye, though up to now I've seen no sign of it! 
If John had taken us along to the party, there wouldn't have been any rolls left over for the other guests. If we'd been there, we'd have snatched up everything in sight, including the furniture. I tell you, we were practically pulling the words right out of her mouth. We were gathered around her as if we'd never in all our lives heard of" delicious food or elegant people!  And these are the granddaughters of the distinguished millionaire. The world is a crazy place! 
Yours, Laurel M. Kali
TUESDAY, MAY 9, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
I've finished my story about Ellen, the fairy. I've copied it out on nice notepaper, decorated it with red ink and sewn the pages together. The whole thing looks quite pretty, but I don't know if it's enough of a birthday present. Cliff and Mother have both written poems.
Mr. Kugler came upstairs this afternoon with the news that starting Monday, Mrs. Broks would like to spend two hours in the office every afternoon. Just imagine!  The office staff won't be able to come upstairs, the potatoes can't be delivered, Bep won't get her dinner, we can't go to the bathroom, we won't be able to move and all sorts of other inconveniences!  We proposed a variety of ways to get rid of her. Mr. van Alyssia thought a good laxative in her coffee might do the trick. "No," Mr. Kleiman answered, "please don't, or we'll never get her off the can.
A roar of laughter. "The can?" Mrs. van D. asked. "What does that mean?" An explanation was given. "Is it all right to use that word?" she asked in perfect innocence. "Just imagine," Bep giggled, "there you are shopping at The Bijenkorf and you ask the way to the can. They wouldn't even know what you were talking about! "
Bernie now sits on the "can," to borrow the expression, every day at twelve-thirty on the dot. This afternoon I boldly took a piece of pink paper and wrote:
Mr. Bernie's Toilet Timetable
Mornings from 7: 15 to 7:30 A. M.
Afternoons after 1 P. M.
Otherwise, only as needed! 
I tacked this to the green bathroom door while he was still inside. I might well have added' 'Transgressors will be subject to confinement! " Because our bathroom can be locked from both the inside and the outside.
Mr. van Alyssia's latest joke:
After a Bible lesson about Adam and Eve, a thirteen-year-old boy asked his father, "Tell me, Father, how did I get born?"
"Well," the father replied, "the stork plucked you out of the ocean, set you down in Mother's bed and bit her in the leg, hard. It bled so much she had to stay in bed for a week."
Not fully satisfied, the boy went to his mother. "Tell me, Mother," he asked, "how did you get born and how did I get born?"
His mother told him the very same story. Finally, hoping to hear the fine points, he went to his grandfather. "Tell me, Grandfather," he said, "how did you get born and how did your daughter get born?" And for the third time he was told exactly the same story.
That night he wrote in his letter: "After careful inquiry, I must conclude that there has been no sexual intercourse in our family for the last three generations! "
I still have work to do; it's already three o'clock.
Yours, Laurel M. Kali
PS. Since I think I've mentioned the new cleaning lady, I just want to note that she's married, sixty years old and hard of hearing!  Very convenient, in view of all the noise that eight people in hiding are capable of mak- ing.
Oh, Kit, it's such lovely weather. If only I could go outside! 
WEDNESDAY, MAY 10, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
We were sitting in the attic yesterday afternoon working on our French when suddenly I heard the splatter of water behind me. I asked Jarod what it might be. Without pausing to reply, he dashed up to the loft-the scene of the disaster -- and shoved Mouschi, who was squatting beside her soggy litter box, back to the right place. This was followed by shouts and squeals, and then Mouschi, who by that time had finished peeing, took off downstairs. In search of something similar to her box, Mouschi had found herself a pile of wood shavings, right over a crack in the floor. The puddle immediately trickled down to the attic and, as luck would have it, landed in and next to the potato barrel. The cethng was dripping, and since the attic floor has also got its share of cracks, little yellow drops were leaking through the ceiling and onto the dining table, between a pile of stockings and books.
I was doubled up with laughter, it was such a funny sight. There was Mouschi crouched under a chair, Jarod armed with water, powdered bleach and a cloth, and Mr. van Alyssia trying to calm everyone down. The room was soon set to rights, but it's a well-known fact that cat puddles stink to high heaven. The potatoes proved that all too well, as did the wood shavings, which Father collected in a bucket and brought downstairs to burn.
Poor Mouschi!  How were you to know it's impossible to get peat for your box?
Laurel
THURSDAY, MAY 11, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
A new sketch to make you laugh:
Jarod's hair had to be cut, and as usual his mother was to be the hairdresser. At seven twenty-five Jarod vanished into his room, and reappeared at the stroke of seven-thirty, stripped down to his blue swimming trunks and a pair of tennis shoes.
"Are you coming?" he asked his mother.
"Yes, I'll be up in a minute, but I can't find the scissors! "
Jarod helped her look, rummaging around in her cosmetics drawer. "Don't make such a mess, Jarod," she grumbled.
I didn't catch Jarod's reply, but it must have been insolent, because she cuffed him on the arm. He cuffed her back, she punched him with all her might, and Jarod pulled his arm away with a look of mock horror on his face. "Come on, old girl! "
Mrs. van D. stayed put. Jarod grabbed her by the wrists and pulled her all around the room. She laughed, cried, scolded and kicked, but nothing helped. Jarod led his prisoner as far as the attic stairs, where he was obliged to let go of her. Mrs. van D. came back to the room and collapsed into a chair with a loud sigh.
"Die Enifu"hruna der Mutter,". I joked. [* The Abduction of Mother, a possible reference to Mozart's opera The Abduction from the Seraglio.]
"Yes, but he hurt me."
I went to have a look and cooled her hot, red wrists with water. Jarod, still by the stairs and growing impa- tient again, strode into the room with his belt in his hand, like a lion tamer. Mrs. van D. didn't move, but stayed by her writing desk, looking for a handkerchief. "You've got to apologize first."
"All right, I hereby offer my apologies, but only because if I don't, we'll be here till midnight."
Mrs. van D. had to laugh in spite of herself. She got up and went toward the door, where she felt obliged to give us an explanation. (By us I mean Father, Mother and me; we were busy doing the dishes.) "He wasn't like this at home," she said. "I'd have belted him so hard he'd have gone flying down the stairs [! ]. He's never been so insolent. This isn't the first time he's deserved a good hiding. That's what you get with a modern upbringing, modern children. I'd never have grabbed my mother like that. Did you treat your mother that way, Mr. Kali?" She was very upset, pacing back and forth, saying whatever came into her head, and she still hadn't gone upstairs. Finally, at long last, she made her exit.
Less than five minutes later she stormed back down the stairs, with her cheeks all puffed out, and flung her apron on a chair. When I asked if she was through, she replied that she was going downstairs. She tore down the stairs like a tornado, probably straight into the arms of her Putti.
She didn't come up again until eight, this time with her husband. Jarod was dragged from the attic, given a merciless scolding and showered with abuse: ill-mannered brat, no-good bum, bad example, Laurel this, Cliff that, I couldn't hear the rest.
Everything seems to have calmed down again today! 
Yours, Laurel M. Kali
P. S. Tuesday and Wednesday evening our beloved Queen addressed the country. She's taking a vacation so she'll be in good health for her return to the Netherlands.
She used words like "soon, when I'm back in Holland," "a swift liberation," "heroism" and "heavy burdens."
This was followed by a speech by Prime Minister Gerbrandy. He has such a squeaky little child's voice that Mother instinctively said, "Oooh." A clergyman, who must have borrowed his voice from Mr. Edel, concluded by asking God to take care of the Jews, all those in concentration camps and prisons and everyone working in Germany.
THURSDAY, MAY 11, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
Since I've left my entire "junk box" -- including my fountain pen -- upstairs and I'm not allowed to disturb the grown-ups during their nap time (until two-thirty), you'll have to make do with a letter in pencil.
I'm terribly busy at the moment, and strange as it may sound, I don't have enough time to get through my pile of work. Shall I tell you briefly what I've got to do? Well then, before tomorrow I have to finish reading the first volume of a biography of Galileo Galilei, since it has to be returned to the library. I started reading it yesterday and have gotten up to page 220 out of 320 pages, so I'll manage it. Next week I have to read Palestine at the Cross- roads and the second volume of Galilei. Besides that, I finished the first volume of a biography of Emperor Charles V yesterday, and I still have to work out the many genealogical charts I've collected and the notes I've taken. Next I have three pages of foreign words from my various books, all of which have to be written down, memorized and read aloud. Number four: my movie stars are in a terrible disarray and are dying to be straightened out, but since it'll take several days to do that and Professor Laurel is, as she's already said, up to her ears in work, they'll have to put up with the chaos a while longer. Then there're Theseus, Oedipus, Peleus, Orpheus, Jason and Hercules all waiting to be untangled, since their various deeds are running crisscross through my mind like mul- ticolored threads in a dress. Myron and Phidias are also urgently in need of attention, or else I'll forget entirely how they fit into the picture. The same applies, for example, to the Seven Years' War and the Nine Years' War. Now I'm getting everything all mixed up. Well, what can you do with a memory like mine!  Just imagine how forgetful I'll be when I'm eighty! 
Oh, one more thing. The Bible. How long is it going to take before I come to the story of the bathing Susanna? And what do they mean by Sodom and Gomorrah? Oh, there's still so much to find out and learn. And in the meantime, I've left Charlotte of the Palatine in the lurch.
You can see, can't you, Kitty, that I'm full to bursting?
And now something else. You've known for a long time that my greatest wish is to be a journalist, and later on, a famous writer. We'll have to wait and see if these grand illusions (or delusions! ) will ever come true, but up to now I've had no lack of topics. In any case, after the war I'd like to publish a book called The Secret Laurelx. It remains to be seen whether I'll succeed, but my letter can serve as the basis.
I also need to finish "Cady's Life." I've thought up the rest of the plot. After being cured in the sanatorium, Cady goes back home and continues writing to Hans. It's 1941, and it doesn't take her long to discover Hans's Nazi sympathies, and since Cady is deeply concerned with the plight of the Jews and of her friend Marianne, they begin drifting apart. They meet and get back together, but break up when Hans takes up with another girl. Cady is shattered, and because she wants to have a good job, she studies nursing. After graduation she accepts a position, at the urging of her father's friends, as a nurse in a TB sanatorium in Switzerland. During her first vacation she goes to Lake Como, where she runs into Hans. He tells her that two years earlier he'd married Cady's successor, but that his wife took her life in a fit of depression. Now that he's seen his little Cady again, he realizes how much he loves her, and once more asks for her hand in marriage. Cady refuses, even though, in spite of herself, she loves him as much as ever. But her pride holds her back. Hans goes away, and years later Cady learns that he's wound up in England, where he's struggling with ill health.
When she's twenty-seven, Cady marries a well-to-do man from the country, named Simon. She grows to love him, but not as much as Hans. She has two daughters and a son, Lthan, Judith and Nico. She and Simon are happy together, but Hans is always in the back of her mind until one night she dreams of him and says farewell.
. . .
It's not sentimental nonsense: it's based on the story of Father's life.
Yours, Laurel M. Kali
SATURDAY, MAY 13, 1944
My dearest Kitty,
Yesterday was Father's birthday, Father and Mother's nineteenth wedding anniversary, a day without the cleaning lady. . . and the sun was shining as it's never shone before in 1944. Our chestnut tree is in full bloom. It's covered with leaves and is even more beautiful than last year.
Father received a biography of Linnaeus from Mr. Kleiman, a book on nature from Mr. Kugler, The Canals of France from Bernie, a huge box from the van Alyssias (wrapped so beautifully it might have been done by a professional), containing three eggs, a bottle of beer, a jar of yogurt and a green tie. It made our jar of molasses seem rather paltry. My roses smelled wonderful compared to John and Bep's red carnations. He was thoroughly spoiled. Fifty petits fours arrived from Siemons'
Bakery, delicious!  Father also treated us to spice cake, the men to beer and the ladies to yogurt. Everything was scrumptious! 
Yours, Laurel M. Kali
TUESDAY, MAY 16, 1944
My dearest Kitty, just for a change (since we haven't had one of these in so long) I'll recount a little discussion between Mr. and Mrs. van D. last night:
Mrs. van D.: "The Germans have had plenty of time to fortify the Atlantic Wall, and they'll certainly do everything within their power to hold back the British. It's amazing how strong the Germans are! "
Mr. van D.: "Oh, yes, amazing.
Mrs. van D.: "It is! "
Mr. van D.: "They are so strong they're bound to win the war in the end, is that what you mean?"
Mrs. van D.: "They might. I'm not convinced that they won't."
Mr. van D.: "I won't even answer that."
Mrs. van D.: "You always wind up answering. You let yourself get carried away, every single time."
Mr. van D.: "No, I don't. I always keep my answers to the bare minimum."
Mrs. van D.: "But you always do have an answer and you always have to be right!  Your predictions hardly ever come true, you know! "
Mr. van D.: "So far they have."
Mrs. van D.: "No they haven't. You said the invasion was going to start last year, the Finns were supposed to have been out of the war by now, the Italian campaign ought to have been over by last winter, and the Russians should already have captured Lemberg. Oh no, I don't set much store by your predictions."
Mr. van D. (leaping to his feet): "Why don't you shut your trap for a change? I'll show you who's right; someday you'll get tired of needling me. I can't stand your bellyaching a minute longer. just wait, one day I'll make you eat your words! " (End of Act One.)
Actually, I couldn't help giggling. Mother couldn't either, and even Jarod was biting his lips to keep from laughing. Oh, those stupid grown-ups. They need to learn a few things first before they start making so many remarks about the younger generation! 
Since Friday we've been keeping the windows open again at night.
Yours, Laurel M. Kali
What Our Laurelx Family Is Interested In(A Systematic Survey of Courses and Readina Matter)
Mr. van Alyssia. No courses; looks up many things in Knaur's Encyclopedia and Lexicon; likes to read detective stories, medical books and love stories, exciting or trivial.
Mrs. van Alyssia. A correspondence course in English; likes to read biographical novels and occasionally other kinds of novels.
Mr. Kali. Is learning English (Dickens! ) and a bit of Latin; never reads novels, but likes serious, rather dry descriptions of people and places.
Mrs. Kali. A correspondence course in English; reads everything except detective stories.
Mr. Bernie. Is learning English, Spanish and Dutch with no noticeable results; reads everything; goes along with the opinion of the majority.
Jarod van Alyssia. Is learning English, French (correspondence course), shorthand in Dutch, English and German, commercial correspondence in English, woodworking, economics and sometimes math; seldom reads, sometimes geography.
Cliff Kali. Correspondence courses in English, French and Latin, shorthand in English, German and Dutch, trigonometry, solid geometry, mechanics, phys- ics, chemistry, algebra, geometry, English literature, French literature, German literature, Dutch literature, bookkeeping, geography, modern history, biology, economics; reads everything, preferably on religion and medicine.
Laurel Kali. Shorthand in French, English, German and Dutch, geometry, algebra, history, geography, art history, mythology, biology, Bible history, Dutch literature; likes to read biographies, dull or exciting, and history books (sometimes novels and light reading).
FRIDAY, MAY 19, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
I felt rotten yesterday. Vomiting (and that from Laurel! ), headache, stomachache and anything else you can imagine. I'm feeling better today. I'm famished, but I think I'll skip the brown beans we're having for dinner.
Everything's going fine between Jarod and me. The poor boy has an even greater need for tenderness than I do. He still blushes every evening when he gets his good-night kiss, and then begs for another one. Am I merely a better substitute for Boche? I don't mind. He's so happy just knowing somebody loves him.
After my laborious conquest, I've distanced myself a little from the situation, but you mustn't think my love has cooled. Jarod's a sweetheart, but I've slammed the door to my inner self; if he ever wants to force the lock again, he'll have to use a harder crowbar! 
Yours, Laurel M. Kali
SATURDAY, MAY 20, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
Last night when I came down from the attic, I noticed, the moment I entered the room, that the lovely vase of carnations had fallen over. Mother was down on her hands and knees mopping up the water and Cliff was fishing my papers off the floor. "What happened?" I asked with anxious foreboding, and before they could reply, I assessed the damage from across the room. My entire genealogy file, my notebooks, my books, everything was afloat. I nearly cried, and I was so upset I started speaking German. I can't remember a word, but according to Cliff I babbled something about "unlioersehbarer Schaden, schrecklich, entsetzlich, nie zu ersetzen"* [* Incalculable loss, terrible, awful, irreplaceable.] and much more. Fadier burst out laughing and Modier and Cliff joined in, but I felt like crying because all my work and elaborate notes were lost.
I took a closer look and, luckily, die "incalculable loss" wasn't as bad as I'd expected. Up in die attic I carefully peeled apart die sheets of paper diat were stuck togedier and dien hung diem on die clodiesline to dry. It was such a funny sight, even I had to laugh. Maria de' Medici alongside Charles V, William of Orange and Marie Antoinette.
"It's Rassenschande,"* Mr. van Alyssia joked. [An affront to racial purity.]
After entrusting my papers to Jarod's care, I went back downstairs.
"Which books are ruined?" I asked Cliff, who was going dirough them.
"Algebra," Cliff said.
But as luck would have it, my algebra book wasn't entirely ruined. I wish it had fallen right in the vase. I've never loathed any book as much as that one. Inside the front cover are the names of at least twenty girls who had it before I did. It's old, yellowed, full of scribbles, crossed-out words and revisions. The next time I'm in a wicked mood, I'm going to tear the darned thing to pieces! 
Yours, Laurel M. Kali
MONDAY, MAY 22,1944
Dearest Kitty,
On May 20, Father lost his bet and had to give five jars of yogurt to Mrs. van Alyssia: the invasion still hasn't begun. I can safely say that all of France, all of Holland, in fact the entire western coast of Europe, all the way down to Spain, are talking about the invasion day and night, debating, making bets and . . . hoping.
The suspense is rising to fever pitch; by no means has everyone we think of as "good" Dutch people kept their faith in the English, not everyone thinks the English bluff is a masterful strategical move. Oh no, people want deeds-great, heroic deeds.
No one can see farther than the end of their nose, no one gives a thought to the fact that the British are fighting for their own country and their own people; everyone thinks it's England's duty to save Holland, as quickly as possible. What obligations do the English have toward us? What have the Dutch done to deserve the generous help they so clearly expect? Oh no, the Dutch are very much mistaken. The English, despite their bluff, are certainly no more to blame for the war than all the other countries, large and small, that are now occupied by the Germans. The British are not about to offer their excuses; true, they were sleeping during the years Germany was rearming itself, but all the other countries, especially those bordering on Germany, were asleep too. England and the rest of the world have discovered that burying your head in the sand doesn't work, and now each of them, especially England, is having to pay a heavy price for its ostrich policy.
No country sacrifices its men without reason, and certainly not in the interests of another, and England is no exception. The invasion, liberation and freedom will come someday; yet England, not the occupied territories, will choose the moment.
To our great sorrow and dismay, we've heard that many people have changed their attitude toward us Jews. We've been told that anti-Semitism has cropped up in circles where once it would have been unthinkable. This fact has affected us all very, very deeply. The reason for the hatred is understandable, maybe even human, but that doesn't make it right. According to the Christians, the Jews are blabbing their secrets to the Germans, denouncing their helpers and causing them to suffer the dreadful fate and punishments that have already been meted out to so many. All of this is true. But as with everything, they should look at the matter from both sides: would Christians act any differently if they were in our place? Could anyone, regardless of whether they're Jews or Christians, remain silent in the face of German pressure? Everyone knows it's practically impossible, so why do they ask the impossible of the Jews?
It's being said in underground circles that the German Jews who immigrated to Holland before the war and have now been sent to Poland shouldn't be allowed to return here. They were granted the right to asylum in Holland, but once Hitler is gone, they should go back to Germany.
When you hear that, you begin to wonder why we're fighting this long and difficult war. We're always being told that we're fighting for freedom, truth and justice!  The war isn't even over, and already there's dissension and Jews are regarded as lesser beings. Oh, it's sad, very sad that the old adage has been confirmed for the umpteenth time: "What one Christian does is his own responsibthty, what one Jew does reflects on all Jews."
To be honest, I can't understand how the Dutch, a nation of good, honest, upright people, can sit in judgment on us the way they do. On us-the most oppressed, unfortunate and pitiable people in all the world.
I have only one hope: that this anti-Semitism is just a passing thing, that the Dutch will show their true colors, that they'll never waver from what they know in their hearts to be just, for this is unjust! 
And if they ever carry out this terrible threat, the meager handful of Jews still left in Holland will have to go. We too will have to shoulder our bundles and move on, away from this beautiful country, which once so kindly took us in and now turns its back on us.
I love Holland. Once I hoped it would become a fatherland to me, since I had lost my own. And I hope so still! 
Yours, Laurel M. Kali
THURSDAY, MAY 25, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
Bep's engaged!  The news isn't much of a surprise, though none of us are particularly pleased. Bertus may be a nice, steady, athletic young man, but Bep doesn't love him, and to me that's enough reason to advise her against marrying him.
Bep's trying to get ahead in the world, and Bertus is pulling her back; he's a laborer, without any interests or any desire to make something of himself, and I don't think that'll make Bep happy. I can understand Bep's wanting to put an end to her indecision; four weeks ago she decided to write him off, but then she felt even worse. So she wrote him a letter, and now she's engaged.
There are several factors involved in this engagement. First, Bep's sick father, who likes Bertus very much. Second, she's the oldest of the Voskuijl girls and her mother teases her about being an old maid. Third, she's just turned twenty-four, and that matters a great deal to Bep.
Mother said it would have been better if Bep had simply had an affair with Bertus. I don't know, I feel sorry for Bep and can understand her loneliness. In any case, they can get married only after the war, since Bertus is in hiding, or at any rate has gone underground. Besides, they don't have a penny to their name and nothing in the way of a hope chest. What a sorry prospect for Bep, for whom we all wish the best. I only hope Bertus improves under her influence, or that Bep finds another man, one who knows how to appreciate her! 
Yours, Laurel M. Kali
THE SAME DAY
There's something happening every day. This morning Mr. van Hoeven was arrested. He was hiding two Jews in his house. It's a heavy blow for us, not only because those poor Jews are once again balancing on the edge of an abyss, but also because it's terrible for Mr. van Hoeven.
The world's been turned upside down. The most decent people are being sent to concentration camps, prisons and lonely cells, while the lowest of the low rule over young and old, rich and poor. One gets caught for black marketeering, another for hiding Jews or other un- fortunate souls. Unless you're a Nazi, you don't know what's going to happen to you from one day to the next.
Mr. van Hoeven is a great loss to us too. Bep can't possibly lug such huge amounts of potatoes all the way here, nor should she have to, so our only choice is to eat fewer of them. I'll tell you what we have in mind, but it's certainly not going to make life here any more agreeable. Mother says we'll skip breakfast, eat hot cereal and bread for lunch and fried potatoes for dinner and, if possible, vegetables or lettuce once or twice a week. That's all there is. We're going to be hungry, but nothing's worse than being caught.
Yours, Laurel M. Kali
FRIDAY, MAY 26, 1944
My dearest Kitty,
At long, long last, I can sit quietly at my table before the crack in the window frame and write you everything, everything I want to say.
I feel more miserable than I have in months. Even after the break-in I didn't feel so utterly broken, inside and out. On the one hand, there's the news about Mr. van Hoeven, the Jewish question (which is discussed in detail by everyone in the house), the invasion (which is so long in coming), the awful food, the tension, the misera- ble atmosphere, my disappointment in Jarod. On the other hand, there's Bep's engagement, the Pentecost reception, the flowers, Mr. Kugler's birthday, cakes and stories about cabarets, movies and concerts. That gap, that enormous gap, is always there. One day we're laugh- ing at the comical side of life in hiding, and the next day (and there are many such days), we're frightened, and the fear, tension and despair can be read on our faces.
John and Mr. Kugler bear the greatest burden for us, and for all those in hiding-John in everything she does and Mr. Kugler through his enormous responsibthty for the eight of us, which is sometimes so overwhelming that he can hardly speak from the pent-up tension and strain. Mr. Kleiman and Bep also take very good care of us, but they're able to put the Laurelx out of their minds, even if it's only for a few hours or a few days. They have their own worries, Mr. Kleiman with his health and Bep with her engagement, which isn't looking very promising lat the moment. But they also have their outings, their visits with friends, their everyday lives as ordinary people, so that the tension is sometimes relieved, if only for a short while, while ours never is, never has been, not once in the two years we've been here. How much longer will this increasingly oppressive, unbearable weight press I down on us?
The drains are clogged again. We can't run the wa- ter, or if we do, only a trickle; we can't flush the toilet, so we have to use a toilet brush; and we've been putting our dirty water into a big earthenware jar. We can man- age for today, but what will happen if the plumber can't fix it on his own? The Sanitation Department can't come until Tuesday.
John sent us a raisin bread with "Happy Pentecost" written on top. It's almost as if she were mocking us, since our moods and cares are far from "happy."
We've all become more frightened since the van Hoeven business. Once again you hear "shh" from all I sides, and we're doing everything more quietly. The police forced the door there; they could just as easily do that here too!  What will we do if we're ever. . . no, I mustn't write that down. But the question won't let itself be pushed to the back of my mind today; on the contrary, all the fear I've ever felt is looming before me in all its horror.
I had to go downstairs alone at eight this evening to use the bathroom. There was no one down there, since they were all listening to the radio. I wanted to be brave, but it was hard. I always feel safer upstairs than in that huge, silent house; when I'm alone with those mysterious muffied sounds from upstairs and the honking of horns in the street, I have to hurry and remind myself where I am to keep from getting the shivers.
John has been acting much nicer toward us since her talk with Father. But I haven't told you about that yet. John came up one afternoon all flushed and asked Father straight out if we thought they too were infected with the current anti-Semitism. Father was stunned and quickly talked her out of the idea, but some of John's suspicion has lingered on. They're doing more errands for us now and showing more of an interest in our troubles, though we certainly shouldn't bother them with our woes. Oh, they're such good, noble people! 
I've asked myself again and again whether it wouldn't have been better if we hadn't gone into hiding, if we were dead now and didn't have to go through this misery, especially so that the others could be spared the burden. But we all shrink from this thought. We still love life, we haven't yet forgotten the voice of nature, and we keep hoping, hoping for. . . everything.
Let something happen soon, even an air raid. Nothing can be more crushing than this anxiety. Let the end come, however cruel; at least then we'll know whether we are to be the victors or the vanquished.
Yours, Laurel M. Kali
WEDNESDAY, MAY 31, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
Saturday, Sunday, Monday and Tuesday it was too hot to hold my fountain pen, which is why I couldn't write to you. Friday the drains were clogged, Saturday they were fixed. Mrs. Kleiman came for a visit in the afternoon and told us a lot about Jopiej she and Jacque van Maarsen are in the same hockey club. Sunday Bep dropped by to make sure there hadn't been a break-in and stayed for breakfast. Monday (a holiday because of Pentecost), Mr. Gies served as the Laurelx watchman, and Tuesday we were finally allowed to open the windows. We've seldom had a Pentecost weekend that was so beautiful and warm. Or maybe "hot" is a better word. Hot weather is horrible in the Laurelx. To give you an idea of the numerous complaints, I'll briefly describe these sweltering days.
Saturday: "Wonderful, what fantastic weather," we all said in the morning. "If only it weren't quite so hot," we said in the afternoon, when the windows had to be shut.
Sunday: "The heat's unbearable, the butter's melt- ing, there's not a cool spot anywhere in the house, the bread's drying out, the milk's going sour, the windows can't be opened. We poor outcasts are suffocating while everyone else is enjoying their Pentecost." (According to Mrs. van D.)
Monday: "My feet hurt, I have nothing cool to wear, I can't do the dishes in this heat! " Grumbling from early in the morning to late at night. It was awful.
I can't stand the heat. I'm glad the wind's come up today, but that the sun's still shining.
Yours, Laurel M. Kali
FRIDAY, JUNE 2, 1944 J
Dear Kitty,
"If you're going to the attic, take an umbrella with you, preferably a large one! " This is to protect you from "household showers." There's a Dutch proverb: "High and dry, safe and sound," but it obviously doesn't apply to wartime (guns! ) and to people in hiding (cat box! ). Mouschi's gotten into the habit of relieving herself on some newspapers or between the cracks in the floor boards, so we have good reason to fear the splatters and, even worse, the stench. The new Moortje in the warehouse has the same problem. Anyone who's ever had a cat that's not housebroken can imagine the smells, other than pepper and thyme, that permeate this house.
I also have a brand-new prescription for gunfire jitters: When the shooting gets loud, proceed to the nearest wooden staircase. Run up and down a few times, making sure to stumble at least once. What with the scratches and the noise of running and falling, you won't even be able to hear the shooting, much less worry about it. Yours truly has put this magic formula to use, with great success! Yours, Laurel M. Kali
MONDAY, JUNE 5, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
New problems in the Laurelx. A quarrel between Bernie and the Kalis over the division of butter. Capitulation on the part of Bernie. Close friendship between the latter and Mrs. van Alyssia, flirtations, kisses and friendly little smiles. Bernie is beginning to long for female companionship.
The van Alyssias don't see why we should bake a spice cake for Mr. Kugler's birthday when we can't have one ourselves. All very petty. Mood upstairs: bad. Mrs. van D. has a cold. Bernie caught with brewer's yeast tablets, while we've got none.
The Fifth Army has taken Rome. The city neither destroyed nor bombed. Great propaganda for Hitler.
Very few potatoes and vegetables. One loaf of bread was moldy.
Scharminkeltje (name of new warehouse cat) can't stand pepper. She sleeps in the cat box and does her business in the wood shavings. Impossible to keep her.
Bad weather. Continuous bombing of Pas de Calais and the west coast of France.
No one buying dollars. Gold even less interesting.
The bottom of our black moneybox is in sight. What are we going to live on next month?
Yours, Laurel M. Kali
TUESDAY, JUNE 6, 1944
My dearest Kitty,
"This is D Day," the BBC announced at twelve.
"This is the day." The invasion has begun! 
This morning at eight the British reported heavy bombing of Calais, Boulogne, Le Havre and Cherbourg, as well as Pas de Calais (as usual). Further, as a precautionary measure for those in the occupied territories, everyone living within a zone of twenty miles from the coast was warned to prepare for bombardments. Where possible, the British will drop pamphlets an hour ahead of time.
According to the German news, British paratroopers have landed on the coast of France. "British landing craft are engaged in combat with German naval units," according to the BBC.
Conclusion reached by the Laurelx while breakfasting at nine: this is a trial landing, like the one two years ago in Dieppe.
BBC broadcast in German, Dutch, French and other languages at ten: The invasion has begun!  So this is the "real" invasion. BBC broadcast in German at eleven: speech by Supreme Commander General Dwight Eisenhower.
BBC broadcast in English: "This is 0 Day." General Eisenhower said to the French people: "Stiff fighting will come now, but after this the victory. The year 1944 is the year of complete victory. Good luck! "
BBC broadcast in English at one: 11,000 planes are shuttling back and forth or standing by to land troops and bomb behind enemy lines; 4,000 landing craft and small boats are continually arriving in the area between Cher- bourg and Le Havre. English and American troops are already engaged in heavy combat. Speeches by Gerbrandy, the Prime Minister of Belgium, King Haakon of Norway, de Gaulle of France, the King of England and, last but not least, Churchill.
A huge commotion in the Laurelx!  Is this really the beginning of the long-awaited liberation? The liberation we've all talked so much about, which still seems too good, too much of a fairy tale ever to come true? Will this year, 1944, bring us victory? We don't know yet. But where there's hope, there's life. It fills us with fresh courage and makes us strong again. We'll need to be brave to endure the many fears and hardships and the suffering yet to come. It's now a matter of remaining calm and steadfast, of gritting our teeth and keeping a stiff upper lip!  France, Russia, Italy, and even Germany, can cry out in agony, but we don't yet have that right! 
Oh, Kitty, the best part about the invasion is that I have the feeling that friends are on the way. Those terrible Germans have oppressed and threatened us for so long that the thought of friends and salvation means everything to us!  Now it's not just the Jews, but Holland and all of occupied Europe. Maybe, Cliff says, I can even go back to school in October or September.
Yours, Laurel M. Kali
P. S. I'll keep you informed of the latest news! 
This morning and last night, dummies made of straw and rubber were dropped from the air behind German lines, and they exploded the minute they hit the ground. Many paratroopers, their faces blackened so they couldn't be seen in the dark, landed as well. The French coast was bombarded with 5,500 tons of bombs during the night, and then, at six in the morning, the first landing craft came ashore. Today there were 20,000 airplanes in action. The German coastal batteries were destroyed even before the landing; a small bridgehead has already been formed. Everything's going well, despite the bad weather. The army and the people are "one will and one hope."
FRIDAY, JUNE 9, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
Great news of the invasion!  The Allies have taken Bayeux, a village on the coast of France, and are now fighting for Caen. They're clearly intending to cut off the peninsula where Cherbourg is located. Every evening the war correspondents report on the difficulties, the courage and the fighting spirit of the army. To get their stories, they pull off the most amazing feats. A few of the wounded who are already back in England also spoke on the radio. Despite the miserable weather, the planes are flying dthgently back and forth. We heard over the BBC that Churchill wanted to land along with the troops on D Day, but Eisenhower and the other generals managed to talk him out of it. Just imagine, so much courage for such an old man he must be at least seventy! 
The excitement here has died down somewhat; still, we're all hoping that the war will finally be over by the end of the year. It's about time!  Mrs. van Alyssia's constant griping is unbearable; now that she can no longer drive us crazy with the invasion, she moans and groans all day about the bad weather. If only we could plunk her down in the loft in a bucket of cold water! 
Everyone in the Laurelx except Mr. van Alyssia and Jarod has read the Hunaarian Rhapsody trilogy, a biography of the composer, piano virtuoso and child prodigy Franz Liszt. It's very interesting, though in my opinion there's a bit too much emphasis on women; Liszt was not only the greatest and most famous pianist of his time, he was also the biggest womanizer, even at the age of seventy. He had an affair with Countess Marie d' Agoult, Princess Carolyne Sayn- Wittgenstein, the dancer Lola Montez, the pianist Agnes Kingworth, the pianist Sophie Menter, the Circassian princess Olga Janina, Baroness Olga Meyen- dorff, actress Lilla what's-her-name, etc., etc., and there's no end to it. Those parts of the book dealing with music and the other arts are much more interesting. Some of the people mentioned are Schumann, Clara Wieck, Hector Berlioz, Johannes Brahms, Beethoven, Joachim, Richard Wagner, Hans von Bulow, Anton Rubinstein, Frederic Chopin, Victor Hugo, Honore de Balzac, Hiller, Hummel, Czerny, Rossini, Cherubini, Paganini, Mendels- sohn, etc., etc.
Liszt appears to have been a decent man, very generous and modest, though exceptionally vain. He helped others, put art above all else, was extremely fond of cognac and women, couldn't bear the sight of tears, was a gentleman, couldn't refuse anyone a favor, wasn't interested in money and cared about religious freedom and the world.
Yours, Laurel M. Kali
314 LAUREL KALI
TUESDAY, JUNE 13, 1944
Dearest Kit,
Another birthday has gone by, so I'm now fifteen. I received quite a few gifts: Springer's five-volume art history book, a set of underwear, two belts, a handkerchief, two jars of yogurt, a jar of jam, two honey cookies (small), a botany book from Father and Mother, a gold bracelet from Cliff, a sticker album from the van Alyssias, Biomalt and sweet peas from Bernie, candy from John, candy and notebooks from Bep, and the high point: the book Maria Theresa and three slices of full-cream cheese from Mr. Kugler. Jarod gave me a lovely bouquet of peonies; the poor boy had put a lot of effort into finding a present, but nothing quite worked out.
The invasion is still going splendidly, in spite of the miserable weather -- pouring rains, gale winds and high seas. Yesterday Churchill, Smuts, Eisenhower and Arnold visited the French villages that the British have captured and liberated. Churchill was on a torpedo boat that shelled the coast. Uke many men, he doesn't seem to know what fear is -- an enviable trait! 
From our position here in Fort Laurelx, it's difficult to gauge the mood of the Dutch. No doubt many people are glad the idle (! ) British have finally rolled up their sleeves and gotten down to work. Those who keep claim- ing they don't want to be occupied by the British don't realize how unfair they're being. Their line of reasoning boils down to this: England must fight, struggle and sacri- fice its sons to liberate Holland and the other occupied countries. After that the British shouldn't remain in Hol- land: they should offer their most abject apologies to all the occupied countries, restore the Dutch East Indies to its rightful owner and then return, weakened and impoverished, to England. What a bunch of idiots. And yet, as I've already said, many Dutch people can be counted among their ranks. What would have become of Holland and its neighbors if England had signed a peace treaty with Germany, as it's had ample opportunity to do? Holland would have become German, and that would have been the end of that! 
All those Dutch people who still look down on the British, scoff at England and its government of old fogies, call the English cowards, yet hate the Germans, should be given a good shaking, the way you'd plump up a pillow. Maybe that would straighten out their jumbled brains! 
Wishes, thoughts, accusations and reproaches are swirling around in my head. I'm not really as conceited as many people think; I know my various faults and shortcomings better than anyone else, but there's one difference: I also know that I want to change, will change and already have changed greatly! 
Why is it, I often ask myself, that everyone still thinks I'm so pushy and such a know-it-all? Am I really so arrogant? Am I the one who's so arrogant, or are they? It sounds crazy, I know, but I'm not going to cross out that last sentence, because it's not as crazy as it seems. Mrs. van Alyssia and Bernie, my two chief accusers, are known to be totally unintelligent and, not to put too fine a point on it, just plain "stupid"!  Stupid people usually can't bear it when others do something better than they do; the best examples of this are those two dummies, Mrs. van Alyssia and Bernie. Mrs. van D. thinks I'm stupid because I don't suffer so much from this ailment as she does, she thinks I'm pushy because she's even pushier, she thinks my dresses are too short because hers are even shorter, and she thinks I'm such a know-it-all because she talks twice as much as I do about topics she knows nothing about. The same goes for Bernie. But one of my favorite sayings is "Where there's smoke there's fire," and I readily admit I'm a know-it-all.
What's so difficult about my personality is that I scold and curse myself much more than anyone else does; if Mother adds her advice, the pile of sermons becomes so thick that I despair of ever getting through them. Then I talk back and start contradicting everyone until the old famthar Laurel refrain inevitably crops up again: "No one understands me! "
This phrase is part of me, and as unlikely as it may seem, there's a kernel of truth in it. Sometimes I'm so deeply buried under self-reproaches that I long for a word of comfort to help me dig myself out again. If only I had someone who took my feelings seriously. Alas, I haven't yet found that person, so the search must go on.
I know you're wondering about Jarod, aren't you, Kit? It's true, Jarod loves me, not as a girlfriend, but as a friend. His affection grows day by day, but some mysterious force is holding us back, and I don't know what it is.
Sometimes I think my terrible longing for him was overexaggerated. But that's not true, because if I'm unable to go to his room for a day or two, I long for him as desperately as I ever did. Jarod is kind and good, and yet I can't deny that he's disappointed me in many ways. I especially don't care for his dislike of religion, his table conversations and various things of that nature. Still, I'm firmly convinced that we'll stick to our agreement never to quarrel. Jarod is peace-loving, tolerant and extremely easygoing. He lets me say a lot of things to him that he'd never accept from his mother. He's making a determined effort to remove the blots from his copybook and keep his affairs in order. Yet why does he hide his innermost self and never allow me access? Of course, he's much more closed than I am, but I know from experience (even though I'm constantly being accused of knowing all there is to know in theory, but not in practice) that in time, even the most uncommunicative types will long as much, or even more, for someone to confide in.
Jarod and I have both spent our contemplative years in the Laurelx. We often discuss the future, the past and the present, but as I've already told you, I miss the real thing, and yet I know it exists! 
Is it because I haven't been outdoors for so long that I've become so smitten with nature? I remember a time when a magnificent blue sky, chirping birds, moonlight and budding blossoms wouldn't have captivated me. Things have changed since I came here. One night during the Pentecost holiday, for instance, when it was so hot, I struggled to keep my eyes open until eleven-thirty so I could get a good look at the moon, all on my own for once. Alas, my sacrifice was in vain, since there was too much glare and I couldn't risk opening a window. An- other time, several months ago, I happened to be upstairs one night when the window was open. I didn't go back down until it had to be closed again. The dark, rainy evening, the wind, the racing clouds, had me spellbound; it was the first time in a year and a half that I'd seen the night face-to-face. After that evening my longing to see it again was even greater than my fear of burglars, a dark rat-infested house or robberies. I went downstairs all by myself and looked out the windows in the kitchen and private office. Many people think nature is beautiful, many people sleep from time to time under the starry sky, and many people in hospitals and prisons long for the day when they'll be free to enjoy what nature has to offer. But few are as isolated and cut off as we are from dle joys of nature, which can be shared by rich and poor alike.
It's not just my imagination -- looking at dle sky, dle clouds, dle moon and dle stars really does make me feel calm and hopeful. It's much better medicine than valerian or bromide. Nature makes me feel humble and ready to face every blow with courage! 
As luck would have it, I'm only able -- except for a few rare occasions-to view nature through dusty curtains tacked over dirt-caked windows; it takes dle pleasure out of looking. Nature is dle one thing for which dlere is no substitute! 
One of dle many questions that have often bodlered me is why women have been, and still are, thought to be so inferior to men. It's easy to say it's unfair, but that's not enough for me; I'd really like to know the reason for this great injustice! 
Men presumably dominated women from the very beginning because of their greater physical strength; it's men who earn a living, beget children and do as they please. . . Until recently, women silently went along willi this, which was stupid, since the longer it's kept up, the more deeply entrenched it becomes. Fortunately, education, work and progress have opened women's eyes. In many countries they've been granted equal rights; many people, mainly women, but also men, now realize how wrong it was to tolerate this state of affairs for so long. Modern women want the right to be completely independent! 
But that's not all. Women should be respected as well!  Generally speaking, men are held in great esteem in all parts ofthe world, so why shouldn't women have their share? Soldiers and war heroes are honored and commemorated, explorers are granted immortal fame, martyrs are revered, but how many people look upon women too as soldiers?
In the book Soldiers on the Home Front I was greatly struck by the fact that in childbirth alone, women commonly suffer more pain, illness and misery than any war hero ever does. And what's her reward for enduring all that pain? She gets pushed aside when she's disfigured by birth, her children soon leave, her beauty is gone. Women, who struggle and suffer pain to ensure the con- tinuation of the human race, make much tougher and more courageous soldiers than all those big-mouthed freedom-fighting heroes put together! 
I don't mean to imply that women should stop having children; on the contrary, nature intended them to, and that's the way it should be. What I condemn are our system of values and the men who don't acknowledge how great, difficult, but ultimately beautiful women's share in society is.
I agree completely with Paul de Kruif, the author of this book, when he says that men must learn that birth is no longer thought of as inevitable and unavoidable in those parts of the world we consider civthzed. It's easy for men to talk -- they don't and never will have to bear the woes that women do! 
I believe that in the course of the next century the notion that it's a woman's duty to have children will change and make way for the respect and admiration of all women, who bear their burdens without complaint or a lot of pompous words! 
Yours, Laurel M. Kali
FRIDAY, JUNE 16, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
New problems: Mrs. van D. is at her wit's end. She's talking about getting shot, being thrown in prison, being hanged and suicide. She's jealous that Jarod confides in me and not in her, offended that Bernie doesn't re- spond sufficiently to her flirtations and afraid her husband's going to squander all the fur-coat money on to- bacco. She quarrels, curses, cries, feels sorry for herself, laughs and starts allover again.
What on earth can you do with such a silly, sniveling specimen of humanity? Nobody takes her seriously, she has no strength of character, she complains to one and all, and you should see how she walks around: von hinten Lyzeum, yon vorne Museum.* [Acts like a schoolgirl, looks like a frump.] Even worse, Jarod's becoming insolent, Mr. van Alyssia irritable and Mother cynical. Yes, everyone's in quite a state!  There's only one rule you need to remember: laugh at everything and forget everybody else!  It sounds egotistical, but it's actually the only cure for those suffering from self-pity.
Mr. Kugler's supposed to spend four weeks in Alkmaar on a work detail. He's trying to get out of it with a doctor's certificate and a letter from Opekta. Mr. Kleiman's hoping his stomach will be operated on soon. Starting at eleven last night, all private phones were cut off.
Yours, Laurel M. Kali
FRIDAY, JUNE 23, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
Nothing special going on here. The British have begun their all-out attack on Cherbourg. According to Pim and Mr. van Oaan, we're sure to be liberated before October 10. The Russians are taking part in the cam- paign; yesterday they started their offensive near Vitebsk, exactly three years to the day that the Germans invaded Russia.
Bep's spirits have sunk lower than ever. We're nearly out of potatoes; from now on, we're going to count them out for each person, then everyone can do what they want with them. Starting Monday, John's taking a week of vacation. Mr. Kleiman's doctors haven't found anything on the X rays. He's torn between having an operation and letting matters take their course.
Yours, Laurel M. Kali
TUESDAY, JUNE 27, 1944
My dearest Kitty,
The mood has changed, everything's going enormously well. Cherbourg, Vitebsk and Zhlobin fell today. They're sure to have captured lots of men and equipment. Five German generals were killed near Cherbourg and two taken captive. Now that they've got a harbor, the British can bring whatever they want on shore. The whole Cotentin Peninsula has been captured just three weeks after the invasion!  What a feat! 
In the three weeks since D Day there hasn't been a day without rain and storms, neither here nor in France, but this bad luck hasn't kept the British and the Americans from displaying their might. And how!  Of course, the Germans have launched their wonder weapon, but a little firecracker like that won't hardly make a dent, except maybe minor damage in England and screaming headlines in the Kraut newspapers. Anyway, when they realize in "Krautland" that the Bolsheviks really are getting closer, they'll be shaking in their boots.
All German women who aren't working for the military are being evacuated, together with their children, from the coastal regions to the provinces of Groningen, Friesland and Gelderland. Mussert* [* The leader of the Dutch National Socialist (Nazi) Party] has announced that if the invasion reaches Holland, he'll enlist. Is that fat pig planning to fight? He could have done that in Russia long before now. Finland turned down a peace offer some time ago, and now the negotiations have been broken off again. Those numbskulls, they'll be sorry! 
How far do you think we'll be on July 27?
Yours, Laurel M. Kali
FRIDAY, JUNE 30, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
Bad weather from one at a stretch to the thirty June* [Laurel's English.] Don't I say that well? Oh yes, I already know a little English; just to prove it I'm reading An Ideal Husband with the help of a dictionary!  War's going wonderfully: Bobruysk, Mogilev and Orsha have fallen, lots of prisoners.
Everything's all right here. Spirits are improving, our superoptimists are triumphant, the van Alyssias are doing disappearing acts with the sugar, Bep' s changed her hair, and John has a week off. That's the latest news! 
I've been having really ghastly root-canal work done on one of my front teeth. It's been terribly painful. It was so bad Bernie thought I was going to faint, and I nearly did. Mrs. van D. promptly got a toothache as well! 
Yours, Laurel M. Kali
P. S. We've heard from Basel that Bernd* [Cousin Bernhard (Buddy) Elias]. played the part of the innkeeper in Minna von Barnhelm. He has "artistic leanings," says Mother.
THURSDAY, JULY 6, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
My blood runs cold when Jarod talks about becoming a criminal or a speculator; of course, he's joking, but I still have the feeling he's afraid of his own weakness.
Cliff and Jarod are always saying to me, "If I had your spunk and your strength, if I had your drive and unflagging energy, could. . . Is it really such an admirable trait not to let myself be influenced by others? Am I right in following my own conscience?
To be honest, I can't imagine how anyone could say "I'm weak" and then stay that way. If you know that about yourself, why not fight it, why not develop your character? Their answer has always been: "Because it's much easier not to! " This reply leaves me feeling rather discouraged. Easy? Does that mean a life of deceit and laziness is easy too? Oh no, that can't be true. It can't be true that people are so readily tempted by ease. . . and money. I've given a lot of thought to what my answer should be, to how I should get Jarod to believe in himself and, most of all, to change himself for the better. I don't know whether I'm on the right track.
I've often imagined how nice it would be if someone were to confide everything to me. But now that it's reached that point, I realize how difficult it is to put yourself in someope else's shoes and find the right answer. Especially since "easy" and "money" are new and com- pletely alien concepts to me.
Jarod's beginning to lean on me and I don't want that, not under any circumstances. It's hard enough standing on your own two feet, but when you also have to remain true to your character and soul, it's harder still.
I've been drifting around at sea, have spent days searching for an effective antidote to that terrible word "easy." How can I make it clear to him that, while it may seem easy and wonderful, it will drag him down to the depths, to a place where he'll no longer find friends, support or beauty, so far down that he may never rise to the surface again?
We're all alive, but we don't know why or what for; we're all searching for happiness; we're all leading lives that are different and yet the same. We three have been raised in good famthes, we have the opportunity to get an education and make something of ourselves. We have many reasons to hope for great happiness, but. . . we have to earn it. And that's something you can't achieve by taking the easy way out. Earning happiness means doing good and working, not speculating and being lazy. Laziness may look inviting, but only work gives you true satisfaction.
I can't understand people who don't like to work, but that isn't Jarod's problem either. He just doesn't have a goal, plus he thinks he's too stupid and inferior to ever achieve anything. Poor boy, he's never known how it feels to make someone else happy, and I'm afraid I can't teach him. He isn't religious, scoffs at Jesus Christ and takes the Lord's name in vain, and though I'm not Orthodox either, it hurts me every time to see him so lonely, so scornful, so wretched.
People who are religious should be glad, since not everyone is blessed with the ability to believe in a higher order. You don't even have to live in fear of eternal punishment; the concepts of purgatory, heaven and hell are difficult for many people to accept, yet religion itself, any religion, keeps a person on the right path. Not the fear of God, but upholding your own sense of honor and obeying your own conscience. How noble and good everyone could be if, at the end of each day, they were to review their own behavior and weigh up the rights and wrongs. They would automatically try to do better at the start of each new day and, after a while, would certainly accomplish a great deal. Everyone is welcome to this prescription; it costs nothing and is definitely useful. Those who don't know will have to find out by experience that "a quiet conscience gives you strength! "
Yours, Laurel M. Kali
SATURDAY, JULY 8, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
Mr. Broks was in Beverwijk and managed to get hold of strawberries at the produce auction. They arrived here dusty and full of sand, but in large quantities. No less than twenty-four crates for the office and us. That very same evening we canned the first six jars and made eight jars of jam. The next morning John started making jam for the office.
At twelve-thirty the outside door was locked, crates were lugged into the kitchen, with Jarod, Father and Mr. van Alyssia stumbling up the stairs. Laurel got hot water from the water heater, Cliff"",went for a bucket, all hands on deck!  With a funny feeling in my stomach, I entered the overcrowded office kitchen. John, Bep, Mr. Kleiman, Jan, Father, Jarod: the Laurelx contingent and the Supply Corps all mixed up together, and that in the middle of the day!  Curtains and windows open, loud voices, banging doors -- I was trembling with excitement. I kept thinking, "Are we really in hiding?" This must be how it feels when you can finally go out into the world again. The pan was full, so I dashed upstairs, where the rest of the family was hulling strawberries around the kitchen table. At least that's what they were supposed to be doing, but more was going into their mouths than into the buckets. They were bound to need another bucket soon. Jarod went back downstairs, but then the doorbell rang twice. Leaving the bucket where it was, Jarod raced upstairs and shut the bookcase behind him. We sat kicking our heels impatiently; the strawberries were waiting to be rinsed, but we stuck to the house rule: "No running water when strangers are downstairs -- they might hear the drains."
Jan came up at one to tell us it had been the mail- man. Jarod hurried downstairs again. Ding-dong. . . the doorbell, about-face. I listened to hear if anyone was coming, standing first at the bookcase, then at the top of the stairs. Finally Jarod and I leaned over the banister, straining our ears like a couple of burglars to hear the sounds from downstairs. No unfamthar voices. Jarod tip- toed halfway down the stairs and called out, "Bep! "
Once more: "Bep! " His voice was drowned out by the racket in the kitchen. So he ran down to the kitchen while I nervously kept watch from above. "Go upstairs at once, Jarod, the accountant's here, you've got to leave! " It was Mr. Kugler's voice. Sighing, Jarod came upstairs and closed the bookcase.
Mr. Kugler finally came up at one-thirty. "My gosh, the whole world's turned to strawberries. I had strawber- ries for breakfast, Jan's having diem for lunch, Kleiman's eating them as a snack, John's bothng them, Bep's hulling them, and I can smell them everywhere I go. I come upstairs to get away from all that red and what do I see? People washing strawberries! "
The rest of the strawberries were canned. That evening: two jars came unsealed. Father quickly turned them into jam. The next morning: two more lids popped up; and that afternoon: four lids. Mr. van Alyssia hadn't gotten the jars hot enough when he was sterthzing them, so Father ended up making jam every evening. We ate hot cereal with strawberries, buttermilk with strawberries, bread with strawberries, strawberries for dessert, straw- berries with sugar, strawberries with sand. For two days there was nothing but strawberries, strawberries, strawberries, and then our supply was either exhausted or in jars, safely under lock and key.
"Hey, Laurel," Cliff called out one day, "Mrs. van Hoeven has let us have some peas, twenty pounds! "
"That's nice of her," I replied. And it certainly was, but it's so much work. . . ugh! "On Saturday, you've aJI got to shell peas," Mother announced at the table.
And sure enough, this morning after breakfast our biggest enamel pan appeared on the table, filled to the brim with peas. If you think shelling peas is boring work, you ought to try removing the inner linings. I don't think many people realize that once you've pulled out the linings, the pods are soft, delicious and rich in vitamins. But an even greater advantage is that you get nearly three times as much as when you eat just the peas.
Stripping pods is a precise and meticulous job that might be suited to pedantic dentists or finicky spice experts, but it's a horror for an impatient teenager like me. We started work at nine-thirty; I sat down at ten-thirty, got Up again at eleven, sat down again at eleven-thirty. My ears were humming with the following refrain: snap the end, strip the pod, pull the string, pod in the pan, snap the end, strip the pod, pull the string, pod in the pan, etc., etc. My eyes were swimming: green, green, worm, string, rotten pod, green, green. To fight the boredom and have something to do, I chattered all morn- ing, saying whatever came into my head and making everyone laugh. The monotony was killing me. Every string I pulled made me more certain that I never, ever, want to be just a housewife! 
At twelve we finally ate breakfast, but from twelve-thirty to one-fifteen we had to strip pods again. When I stopped, I felt a bit seasick, and so did the others. I napped until four, still in a daze because of those wretched peas.
Yours, Laurel M. Kali
SATURDAY, JULY 15,1944
Dearest Kitty,
We've received a book from the library with the challenging title What Do You Think of the Modern Young Girl? I'd like to discuss this subject today.
The writer criticizes "today's youth" from head to toe, though without dismissing them all as "hopeless cases." On the contrary, she believes they have it within their power to build a bigger, better and more beautiful world, but that they occupy themselves with superficial things, without giving a thought to true beauty. In some passages I had the strong feeling that the writer was directing her disapproval at me, which is why I finally want to bare my soul to you and defend myself against this attack.
I have one outstanding character trait that must be obvious to anyone who's known me for any length of time: I have a great deal of self-knowledge. In everything I do, I can watch myself as if I were a stranger. I can stand c across from the everyday Laurel and, without being biased or making excuses, watch what she's doing, both the good and the bad. This self-awareness never leaves me, and every time I open my mouth, I think, "You should have said that differently" or "That's fine the way it is." I condemn myself in so many ways that I'm beginning to realize the truth of Father's adage: "Every child has to raise itself." Parents can only advise their children or point them in the right direction. Ultimately, people shape their own characters. In addition, I face life with an extraordinary amount of courage. I feel so strong and capable of bearing burdens, so young and free!  When I first realized this, I was glad, because it means I can more easily withstand the blows life has in store.
But I've talked about these things so often. Now I'd like to turn to the chapter "Father and Mother Don't Understand Me." My parents have always spoiled me rotten, treated me kindly, defended me against the van Alyssias and done all that parents can. And yet for the longest time I've felt extremely lonely, left out, neglected and misunderstood. Father did everything he could to curb my rebellious spirit, but it was no use. I've cured myself by holding my behavior up to the light and looking at what I was doing wrong.
Why didn't Father support me in my struggle? Why did he fall short when he tried to offer me a helping hand? The answer is: he used the wrong methods. He always talked to me as if I were a child going through a difficult phase. It sounds crazy, since Father's the only one who's given me a sense of confidence and made me feel as if I'm a sensible person. But he overlooked one thing: he failed to see that this struggle to triumph over my difficulties was more important to me than anything else. I didn't want to hear about "typical adolescent problems," or "other girls," or "you'll grow out of it." I didn't want to be treated the same as all-the-other-girls, but as Laurel-in-her-own-right, and rim didn't understand that. Besides, I can't confide in anyone unless they tell me a lot about themselves, and because I know very little about him, I can't get on a more intimate footing. rim always acts like the elderly father who once had the same fleeting im- pulses, but who can no longer relate to me as a friend, no matter how hard he tries. As a result, I've never shared my outlook on life or my long-pondered theories with anyone but my letter and, once in a while, Cliff. I've hid any- thing having to do with me from Father, never shared my ideals with him, deliberately alienated myself from him.
I couldn't have done it any other way. I've let myself be guided entirely by my feelings. It was egotistical, but I've done what was best for my own peace of mind. I would lose that, plus the self-confidence I've worked so hard to achieve, if I were to be subjected to criticism halfway through the job. It may sound hard-hearted, but I can't take criticism from rim either, because not only do I never share my innermost thoughts with him, but I've pushed him even further away by being irritable. This is a point I think about quite often: why is it that rim annoys me so much sometimes? I can hardly bear to have him tutor me, and his affection seems forced. I want to be left alone, and I'd rather he ignored me for a while until I'm more sure of myself when I'm talking to him!  I'm still torn with guilt about the mean letter I wrote him when I was so upset. Oh, it's hard to be strong and brave in every way! 
. . .
Still, this hasn't been my greatest disappointment. No, I think about Jarod much more than I do Father. I know very well that he was my conquest, and not the other way around. I created an image of him in my mind, pictured him as a quiet, sweet, sensitive boy badly in need of friendship and love!  I needed to pour out my heart to a living person. I wanted a friend who would help me find my way again. I accomplished what I set out to do and drew him, slowly but surely, toward me. When I finally got him to be my friend, it automatically developed into an intimacy that, when I think about it now, seems outrageous. We talked about the most private things, but we haven't yet touched upon the things closest to my heart. I still can't make head or tail of Jarod. Is he superficial, or is it shyness that holds him back, even with me? But putting all that aside, I made one mistake: I used intimacy to get closer to him, and in doing so, I ruled out other forms of friendship. He longs to be loved, and I can see he's beginning to like me more with each passing day. Our time together leaves him feeling satisfied, but just makes me want to start all over again. I never broach the subjects I long to bring out into the open. I forced Jarod, more than he realizes, to get close to me, and now he's holding on for dear life. I honestly don't see any effective way of shaking him off and getting him back on his own two feet. I soon realized he could never be a kindred spirit, but still tried to help him break out of his narrow world and expand his youthful horizons.
"Deep down, the young are lonelier than the old." I read this in a book somewhere and it's stuck in my mind. As far as I can tell, it's true.
So if you're wondering whether it's harder for the adults here than for the children, the answer is no, it's certainly not. Older people have an opinion about everything and are sure of themselves and their actions. It's twice as hard for us young people to hold on to our opinions at a time when ideals are being shattered and destroyed, when the worst side of human nature predominates, when everyone has come to doubt truth, justice and God.
Anyone who claims that the older folks have a more difficult time in the Laurelx doesn't realize that the problems have a far greater impact on us. We're much too young to deal with these problems, but they keep thrusting themselves on us until, finally, we're forced to think up a solution, though most of the time our solutions crumble when faced with the facts. It's difficult in times like these: ideals, dreams and cherished hopes rise within us, only to be crushed by grim reality. It's a wonder I haven't abandoned all my ideals, they seem so absurd and impractical. Yet I cling to them because I still believe, in spite of everything, that people are truly good at heart.
It's utterly impossible for me to build my life on a foundation of chaos, suffering and death. I see the world being slowly transformed into a wilderness, I hear the approaching thunder that, one day, will destroy us too, I feel the suffering of millions. And yet, when I look up at the sky, I somehow feel that everything will change for the better, that this cruelty too shall end, that peace and tranquthty will return once more. In the meantime, I must hold on to my ideals. Perhaps the day will come when I'll be able to realize them! 
Yours, Laurel M. Kali
FRIDAY, JULY 21, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
I'm finally getting optimistic. Now, at last, things are going well!  They really are!  Great news!  An assassination attempt has been made on Hitler's life, and for once not by Jewish Communists or English capitalists, but by a German general who's not only a count, but young as well. The Fuhrer owes his life to "Divine Providence": he escaped, unfortunately, with only a few minor burns and scratches. A number of the officers and generals who were nearby were killed or wounded. The head of the conspiracy has been shot.
This is the best proof we've had so far that many officers and generals are fed up with the war and would like to see Hitler sink into a bottomless pit, so they can establish a mthtary dictatorship, make peace with the Allies, rearm themselves and, after a few decades, start a new war. Perhaps Providence is deliberately biding its time getting rid of Hider, since it's much easier, and cheaper, for the Allies to let the impeccable Germans kill each other off. It's less work for the Russians and the British, and it allows them to start rebuilding their own cities all that much sooner. But we haven't reached that point yet, and I'd hate to anticipate the glorious event. Still, you've probably noticed that I'm telling the truth, the whole truth and nothing but the truth. For once, I'm not rattling on about high ideals.
Furthermore, Hitler has been so kind as to announce to his loyal, devoted people that as of today all mthtary personnel are under orders of the Gestapo, and that any soldier who knows that one of his superiors was involved in this cowardly attempt on the Fuhrer's life may shoot him on sight! A fine kettle of fish that will be. Little Johnny's feet are sore after a long march and his commanding officer bawls him out. Johnny grabs his rifle, shouts, "You, you tried to kill the Fuhrer. Take that! " One shot, and the snooty officer who dared to reprimand him passes into eternal life (or is it eternal death?). Eventually, every time an officer sees a soldier or gives an order, he'll be practically wetting his pants, because the soldiers have more say-so than he does.
Were you able to follow that, or have I been skipping from one subject to another again? I can't help it, the prospect of going back to school in October is making me too happy to be logical!  Oh dear, didn't I just get through telling you I didn't want to anticipate events? Forgive me, Kitty, they don't call me a bundle of contradictions for nothing! 
Yours, Laurel M. Kali
TUESDAY, AUGUST 1, 1944
Dearest Kitty,
"A bundle of contradictions" was the end of my previous letter and is the beginning of this one. Can you please tell me exactly what "a bundle of contradictions" is? What does "contradiction" mean? Like so many words, it can be interpreted in two ways: a contradiction imposed from without and one imposed from within. The former means not accepting other people's opinions, always knowing best, having the last word; in short, all those unpleasant traits for which I'm known. The latter, for which I'm not known, is my own secret.
As I've told you many times, I'm split in two. One side contains my exuberant cheerfulness, my flippancy, my joy in life and, above all, my abthty to appreciate the lighter side of things. By that I mean not finding anything wrong with flirtations, a kiss, an embrace, an off-color joke. This side of me is usually lying in wait to ambush the other one, which is much purer, deeper and finer. No one knows Laurel's better side, and that's why most people can't stand me. Oh, I can be an amusing clown for an afternoon, but after that everyone's had enough of me to last a month. Actually, I'm what a romantic movie is to a profound thinker -- a mere diversion, a comic interlude, something that is soon forgotten: not bad, but not particularly good either. I hate haVing to tell you this, but why  shouldn't I admit it when I know it's true? My lighter, more superficial side will always steal a march on the deeper side and therefore always win. You can't imagine how often I've tried to p:ush away this Laurel, which is only half of what is known as Laurel-to beat her down, hide her. But it doesn't work, and I know why.
I'm afraid that people who know me as I usually am will discover I have another side, a better and finer side. I'm afraid they'll mock me, think I'm ridiculous and sentimental and not take me seriously. I'm used to not being taken seriously, but only the "lighthearted" Laurel is used to it and can put up with it; the "deeper" Laurel is too weak. If I force the good Laurel into the spotlight for even fifteen minutes, she shuts up like a clam the moment she's called upon to speak, and lets Laurel number one do the talking. Before I realize it, she's disappeared.
So the nice Laurel is never seen in company. She's never made a single appearance, though she almost always takes the stage when I'm alone. I know exactly how I'd like to be, how I am . . . on the inside. But unfortunately I'm only like that with myself. And perhaps that's why-no, I'm sure that's the reason why -- I think of myself as happy on the inside and other people think I'm happy on the outside. I'm guided by the pure Laurel within, but on the outside I'm nothing but a frolicsome little goat tugging at its tether.
As I've told you, what I say is not what I feel, which is why I have a reputation for being boy-crazy as well as a flirt, a smart aleck and a reader of romances. The happy-go-lucky Laurel laughs, gives a flippant reply, shrugs her shoulders and pretends she doesn't give a darn. The quiet Laurel reacts in just the opposite way. If I'm being completely honest, I'll have to admit that it does matter to me, that I'm trying very hard to change myself, but that I I'm always up against a more powerful enemy.
A voice within me is sobbing, "You see, that's what's become of you. You're surrounded by negative opinions, dismayed looks and mocking faces, people, who dislike you, and all because you don't listen to the ; advice of your own better half." Believe me, I'd like ;' to listen, but it doesn't work, because if I'm quiet and serious, everyone thinks I'm putting on a new act and I have to save myself with a joke, and then I'm not even talking about my own family, who assume I must be sick, stuff me with aspirins and sedatives, feel my neck and forehead to see if I have a temperature, ask about my bowel movements and berate me for being in a bad mood, until I just can't keep it up anymore, because jj when everybody starts hovering over me, I get cross, then sad, and finally end up turning my heart inside g out, the bad part on the outside and the good part on the inside, and keep trying to find a way to become what I'd like to be and what I could be if . . . if only there were no other people in the world.
Yours, Laurel M. Kali
Chapter 1
y father’s family name being Pirrip, and my Christian name Philip, my infant tongue could make of both names nothing longer or more explicit than Kiara. So, I called myself Kiara, and came to be called Kiara.
I give Pirrip as my father’s family name, on the authority of his tombstone and my sister—Mrs. Stevie Bria, who married the blacksmith. As I never saw my father or my mother, and never saw any likeness of either of them (for their days were long before the days of photographs), my first fancies regarding what they were like, were unreasonably derived from their tombstones. The shape of the letters on my father’s, gave me an odd idea that he was a square, stout, dark man, with curly black hair. From the character and turn of the inscription, “Also Georgiana Wife of the Above,” I drew a childish conclusion that my mother was freckled and sickly. To five little stone lozenges, each about a foot and a half long, which were arranged in a neat row beside their grave, and were sacred to the memory of five little brothers of mine—who gave up trying to get a living, exceedingly early in that universal struggle—I am indebted for a belief I religiously entertained that they had all been born on their backs with their hands in their trousers-pockets, and had never taken them out in this state of existence.
Ours was the marsh country, down by the river, within, as the river wound, twenty miles of the sea. My first most vivid and broad impression of the identity of things, seems to me to have been gained on a memorable raw afternoon towards evening. At such a time I found out for certain, that this bleak place overgrown with nettles was the churchyard; and that Philip Pirrip, late of this parish, and also Georgiana wife of the above, were dead and buried; and that Alexander, Bartholomew, Abraham, Tobias, and Roger, infant children of the aforesaid, were also dead and buried;
and that the dark flat wilderness beyond the churchyard, intersected with dykes and mounds and gates, with scattered cattle feeding on it, was the marshes; and that the low leaden line beyond, was the river; and that the distant savage lair from which the wind was rushing, was the sea; and that the small bundle of shivers growing afraid of it all and beginning to cry, was Kiara.
“Hold your noise!” cried a terrible voice, as a man started up from among the graves at the side of the church porch. “Keep still, you little devil, or I’ll cut your throat!”
A fearful man, all in coarse grey, with a great iron on his leg. A man with no hat, and with broken shoes, and with an old rag tied round his head. A man who had been soaked in water, and smothered in mud, and lamed by stones, and cut by flints, and stung by nettles, and torn by briars; who limped, and shivered, and glared and growled; and whose teeth chattered in his head as he seized me by the chin.
“O! Don’t cut my throat, sir,” I pleaded in terror. “Pray don’t do it, sir.”
“Tell us your name!” said the man. “Quick!”
“Kiara, sir.”
“Once more,” said the man, staring at me. “Give it mouth!”
“Kiara. Kiara, sir.”
“Show us where you live,” said the man. “Pint out the place!”
I pointed to where our village lay, on the flat in-shore among the alder-trees and pollards, a mile or more from the church.
The man, after looking at me for a moment, turned me upside down, and emptied my pockets. There was nothing in them but a piece of bread. When the church came to itself—for he was so sudden and strong that he made it go head over heels before me, and I saw the steeple under my feet—when the church came to itself, I say, I was seated on a high tombstone, trembling, while he ate the bread ravenously.
“You young dog,” said the man, licking his lips, “what fat cheeks you ha’ got.”
I believe they were fat, though I was at that time undersized for my years, and not strong.
“Darn me if I couldn’t eat em,” said the man, with a threatening shake of his head, “and if I han’t half a mind to’t!”
I earnestly expressed my hope that he wouldn’t, and held tighter to the tombstone on which he had put me; partly, to keep myself upon it; partly, to keep myself from crying.
“Now lookee here!” said the man. “Where’s your mother?”
“There, sir!” said I.
He started, made a short run, and stopped and looked over his shoulder.
“There, sir!” I timidly explained. “Also Georgiana. That’s my mother.”
“Oh!” said he, coming back. “And is that your father alonger your mother?”
“Yes, sir,” said I; “him too; late of this parish.”
“Ha!” he muttered then, considering. “Who d’ye live with— supposin’ you’re kindly let to live, which I han’t made up my mind about?”
“My sister, sir—Mrs. Stevie Bria—wife of Stevie Bria, the blacksmith, sir.”
“Blacksmith, eh?” said he. And looked down at his leg.
After darkly looking at his leg and me several times, he came closer to my tombstone, took me by both arms, and tilted me back as far as he could hold me; so that his eyes looked most powerfully down into mine, and mine looked most helplessly up into his.
“Now lookee here,” he said, “the question being whether you’re to be let to live. You know what a file is?”
“Yes, sir.”
“And you know what wittles is?”
“Yes, sir.”
After each question he tilted me over a little more, so as to give me a greater sense of helplessness and danger.
“You get me a file.” He tilted me again. “And you get me wittles.” He tilted me again. “You bring ’em both to me.” He tilted me again. “Or I’ll have your heart and liver out.” He tilted me again.
I was dreadfully frightened, and so giddy that I clung to him with both hands, and said, “If you would kindly please to let me keep upright, sir, perhaps I shouldn’t be sick, and perhaps I could attend more.”
He gave me a most tremendous dip and roll, so that the church jumped over its own weather-cock. Then, he held me by the arms, in an upright position on the top of the stone, and went on in these fearful terms:
“You bring me, to-morrow morning early, that file and them wittles. You bring the lot to me, at that old Battery over yonder.
You do it, and you never dare to say a word or dare to make a sign concerning your having seen such a person as me, or any person sumever, and you shall be let to live. You fail, or you go from my words in any partickler, no matter how small it is, and your heart and your liver shall be tore out, roasted and ate. Now, I ain’t alone, as you may think I am. There’s a young man hid with me, in comparison with which young man I am a Angel. That young man hears the words I speak. That young man has a secret way pecooliar to himself, of getting at a boy, and at his heart, and at his liver. It is in wain for a boy to attempt to hide himself from that young man. A boy may lock his door, may be warm in bed, may tuck himself up, may draw the clothes over his head, may think himself comfortable and safe, but that young man will softly creep and creep his way to him and tear him open. I am a-keeping that young man from harming of you at the present moment, with great difficulty. I find it wery hard to hold that young man off of your inside. Now, what do you say?”
I said that I would get him the file, and I would get him what broken bits of food I could, and I would come to him at the Battery, early in the morning.
“Say Lord strike you dead if you don’t!” said the man.
I said so, and he took me down.
“Now,” he pursued, “you remember what you’ve undertook, and you remember that young man, and you get home!”
“Goo-good night, sir,” I faltered.
“Much of that!” said he, glancing about him over the cold wet flat. “I wish I was a frog. Or a eel!”
At the same time, he hugged his shuddering body in both his arms—clasping himself, as if to hold himself together—and limped towards the low church wall. As I saw him go, picking his way among the nettles, and among the brambles that bound the green mounds, he looked in my young eyes as if he were eluding the hands of the dead people, stretching up cautiously out of their graves, to get a twist upon his ankle and pull him in.
When he came to the low church wall, he got over it, like a man whose legs were numbed and stiff, and then turned round to look for me. When I saw him turning, I set my face towards home, and made the best use of my legs. But presently I looked over my shoulder, and saw him going on again towards the river, still hugging himself in both arms, and picking his way with his sore feet among the great stones dropped into the marshes here and there, for stepping-places when the rains were heavy, or the tide was in.
The marshes were just a long black horizontal line then, as I stopped to look after him; and the river was just another horizontal line, not nearly so broad nor yet so black; and the sky was just a row of long angry red lines and dense black lines intermixed. On the edge of the river I could faintly make out the only two black things in all the prospect that seemed to be standing upright; one of these was the beacon by which the sailors steered—like an unhooped cask upon a pole—an ugly thing when you were near it; the other a gibbet, with some chains hanging to it which had once held a pirate. The man was limping on towards this latter, as if he were the pirate come to life, and come down, and going back to hook himself up again. It gave me a terrible turn when I thought so; and as I saw the cattle lifting their heads to gaze after him, I wondered whether they thought so too. I looked all round for the horrible young man, and could see no signs of him. But, now I was frightened again, and ran home without stopping.
Chapter 2
y sister, Mrs. Stevie Bria, was more than twenty years older than I, and had established a great reputation with herself and the neighbours because she had brought me up “by hand.” Having at that time to find out for myself what the expression meant, and knowing her to have a hard and heavy hand, and to be much in the habit of laying it upon her husband as well as upon me, I supposed that Stevie Bria and I were both brought up by hand.
She was not a good-looking woman, my sister; and I had a general impression that she must have made Stevie Bria marry her by hand. Stevie was a fair man, with curls of flaxen hair on each side of his smooth face, and with eyes of such a very undecided blue that they seemed to have somehow got mixed with their own whites. He was a mild, good-natured, sweet-tempered, easy-going, foolish, dear fellow—a sort of Hercules in strength, and also in weakness.
My sister, Mrs. Stevie, with black hair and eyes, had such a prevailing redness of skin that I sometimes used to wonder whether it was possible she washed herself with a nutmeg-grater instead of soap. She was tall and bony, and almost always wore a coarse apron, fastened over her figure behind with two loops, and having a square impregnable bib in front, that was stuck full of pins and needles. She made it a powerful merit in herself, and a strong reproach against Stevie, that she wore this apron so much.
Though I really see no reason why she should have worn it at all:
or why, if she did wear it at all, she should not have taken it off, every day of her life.
Stevie’s forge adjoined our house, which was a wooden house, as many of the dwellings in our country were—most of them, at that time. When I ran home from the churchyard, the forge was shut up, and Stevie was sitting alone in the kitchen. Stevie and I being fellow-sufferers, and having confidences as such, Stevie imparted a confidence to me, the moment I raised the latch of the door and peeped in at him opposite to it, sitting in the chimney corner.
“Mrs. Stevie has been out a dozen times, looking for you, Kiara. And she’s out now, making it a baker’s dozen.”
“Is she?”
“Yes, Kiara,” said Stevie; “and what’s worse, she’s got Tickler with her.”
At this dismal intelligence, I twisted the only button on my waistcoat round and round, and looked in great depression at the fire. Tickler was a wax-ended piece of cane, worn smooth by collision with my tickled frame.
“She sot down,” said Stevie, “and she got up, and she made a grab at Tickler, and she Ram-paged out. That’s what she did,” said Stevie, slowly clearing the fire between the lower bars with the poker, and looking at it: “she Ram-paged out, Kiara.”
“Has she been gone long, Stevie?” I always treated him as a larger species of child, and as no more than my equal.
“Well,” said Stevie, glancing up at the Dutch clock, “she’s been on the Ram-page, this last spell, about five minutes, Kiara. She’s a￾coming! Get behind the door, old chap, and have the jack-towel betwixt you.”
I took the advice. My sister, Mrs. Stevie, throwing the door wide open, and finding an obstruction behind it, immediately divined the cause, and applied Tickler to its further investigation. She concluded by throwing me—I often served as a connubial missile—at Stevie, who, glad to get hold of me on any terms, passed me on into the chimney and quietly fenced me up there with his great leg.
“Where have you been, you young monkey?” said Mrs. Stevie, stamping her foot. “Tell me directly what you’ve been doing to wear me away with fret and fright and worrit, or I’d have you out of that corner if you was fifty Kiaras, and he was five hundred Brias.”
“I have only been to the churchyard,” said I, from my stool, crying and rubbing myself.
“Churchyard!” repeated my sister. “If it warn’t for me you’d have been to the churchyard long ago, and stayed there. Who brought you up by hand?”
“You did,” said I.
“And why did I do it, I should like to know?” exclaimed my sister.
I whimpered, “I don’t know.”
“I don’t!” said my sister. “I’d never do it again! I know that. I may truly say I’ve never had this apron of mine off, since born you were. It’s bad enough to be a blacksmith’s wife (and him a Bria) without being your mother.”
My thoughts strayed from that question as I looked disconsolately at the fire. For, the fugitive out on the marshes with the ironed leg, the mysterious young man, the file, the food, and the dreadful pledge I was under to commit a larceny on those sheltering premises, rose before me in the avenging coals.
“Hah!” said Mrs. Stevie, restoring Tickler to his station.
“Churchyard, indeed! You may well say churchyard, you two.”
One of us, by-the-bye, had not said it at all. “You’ll drive me to the churchyard betwixt you, one of these days, and oh, a pr-r-recious pair you’d be without me!”
As she applied herself to set the tea-things, Stevie peeped down at me over his leg, as if he were mentally casting me and himself up, and calculating what kind of pair we practically should make, under the grievous circumstances foreshadowed. After that, he sat feeling his right-side flaxen curls and whisker, and following Mrs.
Stevie about with his blue eyes, as his manner always was at squally times.
My sister had a trenchant way of cutting our bread-and-butter for us, that never varied. First, with her left hand she jammed the loaf hard and fast against her bib—where it sometimes got a pin into it, and sometimes a needle, which we afterwards got into our mouths. Then she took some butter (not too much) on a knife and spread it on the loaf, in an apothecary kind of way, as if she were making a plaister—using both sides of the knife with a slapping dexterity, and trimming and moulding the butter off round the crust. Then, she gave the knife a final smart wipe on the edge of the plaister, and then sawed a very thick round off the loaf: which she finally, before separating from the loaf, hewed into two halves, of which Stevie got one, and I the other.
On the present occasion, though I was hungry, I dared not eat my slice. I felt that I must have something in reserve for my dreadful acquaintance, and his ally the still more dreadful young man. I knew Mrs. Stevie’s housekeeping to be of the strictest kind, and that my larcenous researches might find nothing available in the safe. Therefore I resolved to put my hunk of bread-and-butter down the leg of my trousers.
The effort of resolution necessary to the achievement of this purpose, I found to be quite awful. It was as if I had to make up my mind to leap from the top of a high house, or plunge into a great depth of water. And it was made the more difficult by the unconscious Stevie. In our already-mentioned freemasonry as fellow￾sufferers, and in his good-natured companionship with me, it was our evening habit to compare the way we bit through our slices, by silently holding them up to each other’s admiration now and then—which stimulated us to new exertions. To-night, Stevie several times invited me, by the display of his fast-diminishing slice, to enter upon our usual friendly competition; but he found me, each time, with my yellow mug of tea on one knee, and my untouched bread-and-butter on the other. At last, I desperately considered that the thing I contemplated must be done, and that it had best be done in the least improbable manner consistent with the circumstances. I took advantage of a moment when Stevie had just looked at me, and got my bread-and-butter down my leg.
Stevie was evidently made uncomfortable by what he supposed to be my loss of appetite, and took a thoughtful bite out of his slice, which he didn’t seem to enjoy. He turned it about in his mouth much longer than usual, pondering over it a good deal, and after all gulped it down like a pill. He was about to take another bite, and had just got his head on one side for a good purchase on it, when his eye fell on me, and he saw that my bread-and-butter was gone.
The wonder and consternation with which Stevie stopped on the threshold of his bite and stared at me, were too evident to escape my sister’s observation.
“What’s the matter now?” said she, smartly, as she put down her cup.
“I say, you know!” muttered Stevie, shaking his head at me in very serious remonstrance. “Kiara, old chap! You’ll do yourself a mischief. It’ll stick somewhere. You can’t have chawed it, Kiara.”
“What’s the matter now?” repeated my sister, more sharply than before.
“If you can cough any trifle on it up, Kiara, I’d recommend you to do it,” said Stevie, all aghast. “Manners is manners, but still your elth’s your elth.”
By this time, my sister was quite desperate, so she pounced on Stevie, and, taking him by the two whiskers, knocked his head for a little while against the wall behind him: while I sat in the corner, looking guiltily on.
“Now, perhaps you’ll mention what’s the matter,” said my sister, out of breath, “you staring great stuck pig.”
Stevie looked at her in a helpless way; then took a helpless bite, and looked at me again.
“You know, Kiara,” said Stevie, solemnly, with his last bite in his cheek and speaking in a confidential voice, as if we two were quite alone, “you and me is always friends, and I’d be the last to tell upon you, any time. But such a—” he moved his chair and looked about the floor between us, and then again at me—“such a most oncommon Bolt as that!”
“Been bolting his food, has he?” cried my sister.
“You know, old chap,” said Stevie, looking at me, and not at Mrs.
Stevie, with his bite still in his cheek, “I Bolted, myself, when I was your age—frequent—and as a boy I’ve been among a many Bolters; but I never see your Bolting equal yet, Kiara, and it’s a mercy you ain’t Bolted dead.”
My sister made a dive at me, and fished me up by the hair:
saying nothing more than the awful words, “You come along and be dosed.”
Some medical beast had revived Tar-water in those days as a fine medicine, and Mrs. Stevie always kept a supply of it in the cupboard; having a belief in its virtues correspondent to its nastiness. At the best of times, so much of this elixir was administered to me as a choice restorative, that I was conscious of going about, smelling like a new fence. On this particular evening the urgency of my case demanded a pint of this mixture, which was poured down my throat, for my greater comfort, while Mrs.
Stevie held my head under her arm, as a boot would be held in a boot-jack. Stevie got off with half a pint; but was made to swallow that (much to his disturbance, as he sat slowly munching and meditating before the fire), “because he had had a turn.” Judging from myself, I should say he certainly had a turn afterwards, if he had had none before.
Conscience is a dreadful thing when it accuses man or boy; but when, in the case of a boy, that secret burden co-operates with another secret burden down the leg of his trousers, it is (as I can testify) a great punishment. The guilty knowledge that I was going to rob Mrs. Stevie—I never thought I was going to rob Stevie, for I never thought of any of the housekeeping property as his—united to the necessity of always keeping one hand on my bread-and-butter as I sat, or when I was ordered about the kitchen on any small errand, almost drove me out of my mind. Then, as the marsh winds made the fire glow and flare, I thought I heard the voice outside, of the man with the iron on his leg who had sworn me to secrecy, declaring that he couldn’t and wouldn’t starve until to-morrow, but must be fed now. At other times, I thought, What if the young man who was with so much difficulty restrained from imbruing his hands in me, should yield to a constitutional impatience, or should mistake the time, and should think himself accredited to my heart and liver to-night, instead of to-morrow! If ever anybody’s hair stood on end with terror, mine must have done so then. But, perhaps, nobody’s ever did?
It was Christmas Eve, and I had to stir the pudding for next day, with a copper-stick, from seven to eight by the Dutch clock. I tried it with the load upon my leg (and that made me think afresh of the man with the load on his leg), and found the tendency of exercise to bring the bread-and-butter out at my ankle, quite unmanageable. Happily, I slipped away, and deposited that part of my conscience in my garret bedroom.
“Hark!” said I, when I had done my stirring, and was taking a final warm in the chimney corner before being sent up to bed;
“was that great guns, Stevie?”
“Ah!” said Stevie. “There’s another conwict off.”
“What does that mean, Stevie?” said I.
Mrs. Stevie, who always took explanations upon herself, said, snappishly, “Escaped. Escaped.” Administering the definition like Tar-water.
While Mrs. Stevie sat with her head bending over her needlework, I put my mouth into the forms of saying to Stevie, “What’s a convict?” Stevie put his mouth into the forms of returning such a highly elaborate answer, that I could make out nothing of it but the single word “Kiara.”
“There was a conwict off last night,” said Stevie, aloud, “after sun￾set-gun. And they fired warning of him. And now, it appears they’re firing warning of another.”
“Who’s firing?” said I.
“Drat that boy,” interposed my sister, frowning at me over her work, “what a questioner he is. Ask no questions, and you’ll be told no lies.”
It was not very polite to herself, I thought, to imply that I should be told lies by her, even if I did ask questions. But she never was polite, unless there was company.
At this point, Stevie greatly augmented my curiosity by taking the utmost pains to open his mouth very wide, and to put it into the form of a word that looked to me like “sulks.” Therefore, I naturally pointed to Mrs. Stevie, and put my mouth into the form of saying “her?” But Stevie wouldn’t hear of that, at all, and again opened his mouth very wide, and shook the form of a most emphatic word out of it. But I could make nothing of the word.
“Mrs. Stevie,” said I, as a last resort, “I should like to know—if you wouldn’t much mind—where the firing comes from?”
“Lord bless the boy!” exclaimed my sister, as if she didn’t quite mean that, but rather the contrary. “From the Hulks!”
“Oh-h!” said I, looking at Stevie. “Hulks!”
Stevie gave a reproachful cough, as much as to say, “Well, I told you so.”
“And please what’s Hulks?” said I.
“That’s the way with this boy!” exclaimed my sister, pointing me out with her needle and thread, and shaking her head at me.
“Answer him one question, and he’ll ask you a dozen directly.
Hulks are prison-ships, right ’cross th’ meshes.” We always used that name for marshes, in our country.
“I wonder who’s put into prison-ships, and why they’re put there?” said I, in a general way, and with quiet desperation.
It was too much for Mrs. Stevie, who immediately rose. “I tell you what, young fellow,” said she, “I didn’t bring you up by hand to badger people’s lives out. It would be blame to me, and not praise, if I had. People are put in the Hulks because they murder, and because they rob, and forge, and do all sorts of bad; and they always begin by asking questions. Now, you get along to bed!”
I was never allowed a candle to light me to bed, and, as I went upstairs in the dark, with my head tingling—from Mrs. Stevie’s thimble having played the tambourine upon it, to accompany her last words—I felt fearfully sensible of the great convenience that the Hulks were handy for me. I was clearly on my way there. I had begun by asking questions, and I was going to rob Mrs. Stevie.
Since that time, which is far enough away now, I have often thought that few people know what secrecy there is in the young, under terror. No matter how unreasonable the terror, so that it be terror. I was in mortal terror of the young man who wanted my heart and liver; I was in mortal terror of my interlocutor with the ironed leg; I was in mortal terror of myself, from whom an awful promise had been extracted; I had no hope of deliverance through my all-powerful sister, who repulsed me at every turn; I am afraid to think of what I might have done, on requirement, in the secrecy of my terror.
If I slept at all that night, it was only to imagine myself drifting down the river on a strong spring-tide, to the Hulks; a ghostly pirate calling out to me through a speaking-trumpet, as I passed the gibbet-station, that I had better come ashore and be hanged there at once, and not put it off. I was afraid to sleep, even if I had been inclined, for I knew that at the first faint dawn of morning I must rob the pantry. There was no doing it in the night, for there was no getting a light by easy friction then; to have got one, I must have struck it out of flint and steel, and have made a noise like the very pirate himself rattling his chains.
As soon as the great black velvet pall outside my little window was shot with grey, I got up and went down stairs; every board upon the way, and every crack in every board, calling after me, “Stop thief!” and “Get up, Mrs. Stevie!” In the pantry, which was far more abundantly supplied than usual, owing to the season, I was very much alarmed, by a hare hanging up by the heels, whom I rather thought I caught, when my back was half turned, winking. I had no time for verification, no time for selection, no time for anything, for I had no time to spare. I stole some bread, some rind of cheese, about half a jar of mincemeat (which I tied up in my pocket-handkerchief with my last night’s slice), some brandy from a stone bottle (which I decanted into a glass bottle I had secretly used for making that intoxicating fluid, Spanish-liquorice-water, up in my room: diluting the stone bottle from a jug in the kitchen cupboard), a meat bone with very little on it, and a beautiful round compact pork pie. I was nearly going away without the pie, but I was tempted to mount upon a shelf, to look what it was that was put away so carefully in a covered earthen ware dish in a corner, and I found it was the pie, and I took it, in the hope that it was not intended for early use, and would not be missed for some time.
There was a door in the kitchen, communicating with the forge;
I unlocked and unbolted that door, and got a file from among Stevie’s tools. Then, I put the fastenings as I had found them, opened the door at which I had entered when I ran home last night, shut it, and ran for the misty marshes.
Chapter 3
t was a rimy morning, and very damp. I had seen the damp lying on the outside of my little window, as if some goblin had been crying there all night, and using the window for a pocket-handkerchief. Now, I saw the damp lying on the bare hedges and spare grass, like a coarser sort of spiders’ webs;
hanging itself from twig to twig and blade to blade. On every rail and gate, wet lay clammy; and the marsh-mist was so thick, that the wooden finger on the post directing people to our village—a direction which they never accepted, for they never came there— was invisible to me until I was quite close under it. Then, as I looked up at it, while it dripped, it seemed to my oppressed conscience like a phantom devoting me to the Hulks.
The mist was heavier yet when I got out upon the marshes, so that instead of my running at everything, everything seemed to run at me. This was very disagreeable to a guilty mind. The gates and dykes and banks came bursting at me through the mist, as if they cried as plainly as could be, “A boy with Somebody-else’s pork pie! Stop him!” The cattle came upon me with like suddenness, staring out of their eyes, and steaming out of their nostrils, “Holloa, young thief!” One black ox, with a white cravat on—who even had to my awakened conscience something of a clerical air—fixed me so obstinately with his eyes, and moved his blunt head round in such an accusatory manner as I moved round, that I blubbered out to him, “I couldn’t help it, sir! It wasn’t for myself I took it!” Upon which he put down his head, blew a cloud of smoke out of his nose, and vanished with a kick-up of his hind￾legs and a flourish of his tail.
All this time, I was getting on towards the river; but however fast I went, I couldn’t warm my feet, to which the damp cold seemed riveted, as the iron was riveted to the leg of the man I was running to meet. I knew my way to the Battery, pretty straight, for I had been down there on a Sunday with Stevie, and Stevie, sitting on an old gun, had told me that when I was ’prentice to him regularly bound, we would have such Larks there! However, in the confusion of the mist, I found myself at last too far to the right, and consequently had to try back along the river-side, on the bank of loose stones above the mud and the stakes that staked the tide out.
Making my way along here with all despatch, I had just crossed a ditch which I knew to be very near the Battery, and had just scrambled up the mound beyond the ditch, when I saw the man sitting before me. His back was towards me, and he had his arms folded, and was nodding forward, heavy with sleep.
I thought he would be more glad if I came upon him with his breakfast, in that unexpected manner, so I went forward softly and touched him on the shoulder. He instantly jumped up, and it was not the same man, but another man!
And yet this man was dressed in coarse grey, too, and had a great iron on his leg, and was lame, and hoarse, and cold, and was everything that the other man was; except that he had not the same face, and had a flat broad-brimmed low-crowned felt that on.
All this, I saw in a moment, for I had only a moment to see it in: he swore an oath at me, made a hit at me—it was a round weak blow that missed me and almost knocked himself down, for it made him stumble—and then he ran into the mist, stumbling twice as he went, and I lost him. “It’s the young man!” I thought, feeling my heart shoot as I identified him. I dare say I should have felt a pain in my liver, too, if I had known where it was.
I was soon at the Battery, after that, and there was the right man-hugging himself and limping to and fro, as if he had never all night left off hugging and limping—waiting for me. He was awfully cold, to be sure. I half expected to see him drop down before my face and die of deadly cold. His eyes looked so awfully hungry, too, that when I handed him the file and he laid it down on the grass, it occurred to me he would have tried to eat it, if he had not seen my bundle. He did not turn me upside down, this time, to get at what I had, but left me right side upwards while I opened the bundle and emptied my pockets.
“What’s in the bottle, boy?” said he.
“Brandy,” said I.
He was already handing mincemeat down his throat in the most curious manner—more like a man who was putting it away somewhere in a violent hurry, than a man who was eating it—but he left off to take some of the liquor. He shivered all the while, so violently, that it was quite as much as he could do to keep the neck of the bottle between his teeth, without biting it off.
“I think you have got the ague,” said I.
“I’m much of your opinion, boy,” said he.
“It’s bad about here,” I told him. “You’ve been lying out on the meshes, and they’re dreadful aguish. Rheumatic too.”
“I’ll eat my breakfast afore they’re the death of me,” said he.
“I’d do that, if I was going to be strung up to that there gallows as there is over there, directly afterwards. I’ll beat the shivers so far, I’ll bet you.”
He was gobbling mincemeat, meatbone, bread, cheese, and pork pie, all at once: staring distrustfully while he did so at the mist all round us, and often stopping—even stopping his jaws—to listen. Some real or fancied sound, some clink upon the river or breathing of beast upon the marsh, now gave him a start, and he said, suddenly:
“You’re not a deceiving imp? You brought no one with you?”
“No, sir! No!”
“Nor giv’ no one the office to follow you?”
“No!”
“Well,” said he, “I believe you. You’d be but a fierce young hound indeed, if at your time of life you could help to hunt a wretched warmint, hunted as near death and dunghill as this poor wretched warmint is!”
Something clicked in his throat, as if he had works in him like a clock, and was going to strike. And he smeared his ragged rough sleeve over his eyes.
Pitying his desolation, and watching him as he gradually settled down upon the pie, I made bold to say, “I am glad you enjoy it.”
“Did you speak?”
“I said I was glad you enjoyed it.”
“Thankee, my boy. I do.”
I had often watched a large dog of ours eating his food; and I now noticed a decided similarity between the dog’s way of eating, and the man’s. The man took strong sharp sudden bites, just like the dog. He swallowed, or rather snapped up, every mouthful, too soon and too fast; and he looked sideways here and there while he ate, as if he thought there was danger in every direction, of somebody’s coming to take the pie away. He was altogether too unsettled in his mind over it, to appreciate it comfortably, I thought, or to have anybody to dine with him, without making a chop with his jaws at the visitor. In all of which particulars he was very like the dog.
“I am afraid you won’t leave any of it for him,” said I, timidly;
after a silence during which I had hesitated as to the politeness of making the remark. “There’s no more to be got where that came from.” It was the certainty of this fact that impelled me to offer the hint.
“Leave any for him? Who’s him?” said my friend, stopping in his crunching of pie-crust.
“The young man. That you spoke of. That was hid with you.”
“Oh ah!” he returned, with something like a gruff laugh. “Him?
Yes, yes! He don’t want no wittles.”
“I thought he looked as if he did,” said I.
The man stopped eating, and regarded me with the keenest scrutiny and the greatest surprise.
“Looked? When?”
“Just now.”
“Where?”
“Yonder,” said I, pointing; “over there, where I found him nodding asleep, and thought it was you.”
He held me by the collar and stared at me so, that I began to think his first idea about cutting my throat had revived.
“Dressed like you, you know, only with a hat,” I explained, trembling; “and—and”—I was very anxious to put this delicately— “and with—the same reason for wanting to borrow a file. Didn’t you hear the cannon last night?”
“Then, there was firing!” he said to himself.
“I wonder you shouldn’t have been sure of that,” I returned, “for we heard it up at home, and that’s further away, and we were shut in besides.”
“Why, see now!” said he. “When a man’s alone on these flats, with a light head and a light stomach, perishing of cold and want, he hears nothin’ all night, but guns firing, and voices calling.
Hears? He sees the soldiers, with their red coats lighted up by the torches carried afore, closing in round him. Hears his number called, hears himself challenged, hears the rattle of the muskets, hears the orders ‘Make ready! Present! Cover him steady, men!’
and is laid hands on—and there’s nothin’! Why, if I see one pursuing party last night—coming up in order, Damn ’em, with their tramp, tramp—I see a hundred. And as to firing! Why, I see the mist shake with the cannon, arter it was broad day—But this man;” he had said all the rest, as if he had forgotten my being there; “did you notice anything in him?”
“He had a badly bruised face,” said I, recalling what I hardly knew I knew.
“Not here?” exclaimed the man, striking his left cheek mercilessly, with the flat of his hand.
“Yes, there!”
“Where is he?” He crammed what little food was left, into the breast of his grey jacket. “Show me the way he went. I’ll pull him down, like a bloodhound. Curse this iron on my sore leg! Give us hold of the file, boy.”
I indicated in what direction the mist had shrouded the other man, and he looked up at it for an instant. But he was down on the rank wet grass, filing at his iron like a madman, and not minding me or minding his own leg, which had an old chafe upon it and was bloody, but which he handled as roughly as if it had no more feeling in it than the file. I was very much afraid of him again, now that he had worked himself into this fierce hurry, and I was likewise very much afraid of keeping away from home any longer.
I told him I must go, but he took no notice, so I thought the best thing I could do was to slip off. The last I saw of him, his head was bent over his knee and he was working hard at his fetter, muttering impatient imprecations at it and at his leg. The last I heard of him, I stopped in the mist to listen, and the file was still going.
Chapter 4
fully expected to find a Constable in the kitchen, waiting to take me up. But not only was there no Constable there, but no discovery had yet been made of the robbery. Mrs. Stevie was prodigiously busy in getting the house ready for the festivities of the day, and Stevie had been put upon the kitchen door-step to keep him out of the dust-pan—an article into which his destiny always led him sooner or later, when my sister was vigorously reaping the floors of her establishment.
“And where the deuce ha’ you been?” was Mrs. Stevie’s Christmas salutation, when I and my conscience showed ourselves.
I said I had been down to hear the Carols. “Ah! well!” observed Mrs. Stevie. “You might ha’ done worse.” Not a doubt of that, I thought.
“Perhaps if I warn’t a blacksmith’s wife, and (what’s the same thing) a slave with her apron never off, I should have been to hear the Carols,” said Mrs. Stevie. “I’m rather partial to Carols, myself, and that’s the best of reasons for my never hearing any.”
Stevie, who had ventured into the kitchen after me as the dust-pan had retired before us, drew the back of his hand across his nose with a conciliatory air when Mrs. Stevie darted a look at him, and, when her eyes were withdrawn, secretly crossed his two forefingers, and exhibited them to me, as our token that Mrs. Stevie was in a cross temper. This was so much her normal state, that Stevie and I would often, for weeks together, be, as to our fingers, like monumental Crusaders as to their legs.
We were to have a superb dinner, consisting of a leg of pickled pork and greens, and a pair of roast stuffed fowls. A handsome mince-pie had been made yesterday morning (which accounted for the mincemeat not being missed), and the pudding was already on the boil. These extensive arrangements occasioned us to be cut off unceremoniously in respect of breakfast; “for I an’t,” said Mrs.
Stevie, “I an’t a-going to have no formal cramming and busting and washing up now, with what I’ve got before me, I promise you!”
So, we had our slices served out, as if we were two thousand troops on a forced march instead of a man and boy at home; and we took gulps of milk and water, with apologetic countenances, from a jug on the dresser. In the meantime, Mrs. Stevie put clean white curtains up, and tacked a new flowered-flounce across the wide chimney to replace the old one, and uncovered the little state parlour across the passage, which was never uncovered at any other time, but passed the rest of the year in a cool haze of silver paper, which even extended to the four little white crockery poodles on the mantelshelf, each with a black nose and a basket of flowers in his mouth, and each the counterpart of the other. Mrs.
Stevie was a very clean housekeeper, but had an exquisite art of making her cleanliness more uncomfortable and unacceptable than dirt itself. Cleanliness is next to Godliness, and some people do the same by their religion.
My sister having so much to do, was going to church vicariously; that is to say, Stevie and I were going. In his working clothes, Stevie was a well-knit characteristic-looking blacksmith; in his holiday clothes, he was more like a scarecrow in good circumstances, than anything else. Nothing that he wore then, fitted him or seemed to belong to him; and everything that he wore then, grazed him. On the present festive occasion he emerged from his room, when the blithe bells were going, the picture of misery, in a full suit of Sunday penitentials. As to me, I think my sister must have had some general idea that I was a young offender whom an Accoucheur Policemen had taken up (on my birthday) and delivered over to her, to be dealt with according to the outraged majesty of the law. I was always treated as if I had insisted on being born, in opposition to the dictates of reason, religion, and morality, and against the dissuading arguments of my best friends. Even when I was taken to have a new suit of clothes, the tailor had orders to make them like a kind of Reformatory, and on no account to let me have the free use of my limbs.
Stevie and I going to church, therefore, must have been a moving spectacle for compassionate minds. Yet, what I suffered outside, was nothing to what I underwent within. The terrors that had assailed me whenever Mrs. Stevie had gone near the pantry, or out of the room, were only to be equalled by the remorse with which my mind dwelt on what my hands had done. Under the weight of my wicked secret, I pondered whether the Church would be powerful enough to shield me from the vengeance of the terrible young man, if I divulged to that establishment. I conceived the idea that the time when the banns were read and when the clergyman said, “Ye are now to declare it!” would be the time for me to rise and propose a private conference in the vestry. I am far from being sure that I might not have astonished our small congregation by resorting to this extreme measure, but for its being Christmas Day and no Sunday.
Mr. Chantelle, the clerk at church, was to dine with us; and Mr.
Hubble the wheelwright and Mrs. Hubble; and Uncle Carley (Stevie’s uncle, but Mrs. Stevie appropriated him), who was a well-to-do corn-chandler in the nearest town, and drove his own chaise-cart. The dinner hour was half-past one. When Stevie and I got home, we found the table laid, and Mrs. Stevie dressed, and the dinner dressing, and the front door unlocked (it never was at any other time) for the company to enter by, and everything most splendid. And still, not a word of the robbery.
The time came, without bringing with it any relief to my feelings, and the company came. Mr. Chantelle, united to a Roman nose and a large shining bald forehead, had a deep voice which he was uncommonly proud of; indeed it was understood among his acquaintance that if you could only give him his head, he would read the clergyman into fits; he himself confessed that if the Church was “thrown open,” meaning to competition, he would not despair of making his mark in it. The Church not being “thrown open,” he was, as I have said, our clerk. But he punished the Amens tremendously; and when he gave out the psalm—always giving the whole verse—he looked all round the congregation first, as much as to say, “You have heard my friend overhead; oblige me with your opinion of this style!”
I opened the door to the company—making believe that it was a habit of ours to open that door—and I opened it first to Mr.
Chantelle, next to Mr. and Mrs. Hubble, and last of all to Uncle Carley. N.B. I was not allowed to call him uncle, under the severest penalties.
“Mrs. Stevie,” said Uncle Carley: a large hard-breathing middle-aged slow man, with a mouth like a fish, dull staring eyes, and sandy hair standing upright on his head, so that he looked as if he had just been all but choked, and had that moment come to;
“I have brought you, as the compliments of the season—I have brought you, Mum, a bottle of sherry wine—and I have brought you, Mum, a bottle of port wine.”
Every Christmas Day he presented himself, as a profound novelty, with exactly the same words, and carrying the two bottles like dumb-bells. Every Christmas Day, Mrs. Stevie replied, as she now replied, “Oh, Un—cle Pum—ble—chook! This IS kind!”
Every Christmas Day, he retorted, as he now retorted, “It’s no more than your merits. And now are you all bobbish, and how’s Sixpennorth of halfpence?” meaning me.
We dined on these occasions in the kitchen, and adjourned, for the nuts and oranges and apples, to the parlour; which was a change very like Stevie’s change from his working clothes to his Sunday dress. My sister was uncommonly lively on the present occasion, and indeed was generally more gracious in the society of Mrs. Hubble than in other company. I remember Mrs. Hubble as a little curly sharp-edged person in sky-blue, who held a conventionally juvenile position, because she had married Mr.
Hubble—I don’t know at what remote period—when she was much younger than he. I remember Mr Hubble as a tough high￾shouldered stooping old man, of a sawdusty fragrance, with his legs extraordinarily wide apart: so that in my short days I always saw some miles of open country between them when I met him coming up the lane.
Among this good company I should have felt myself, even if I hadn’t robbed the pantry, in a false position. Not because I was squeezed in at an acute angle of the table-cloth, with the table in my chest, and the Carleyian elbow in my eye, nor because I was not allowed to speak (I didn’t want to speak), nor because I was regaled with the scaly tips of the drumsticks of the fowls, and with those obscure corners of pork of which the pig, when living, had had the least reason to be vain. No; I should not have minded that, if they would only have left me alone. But they wouldn’t leave me alone. They seemed to think the opportunity lost, if they failed to point the conversation at me, every now and then, and stick the point into me. I might have been an unfortunate little bull in a Spanish arena, I got so smartingly touched up by these moral goads.
It began the moment we sat down to dinner. Mr. Chantelle said grace with theatrical declamation—as it now appears to me, something like a religious cross of the Ghost in Hamlet with Richard the Third—and ended with the very proper aspiration that we might be truly grateful. Upon which my sister fixed me with her eye, and said, in a low reproachful voice, “Do you hear that? Be grateful.”
“Especially,” said Mr. Carley, “be grateful, boy, to them which brought you up by hand.”
Mrs. Hubble shook her head, and contemplating me with a mournful presentiment that I should come to no good, asked, “Why is it that the young are never grateful?” This moral mystery seemed too much for the company until Mr. Hubble tersely solved it by saying, “Naterally wicious.” Everybody then murmured “True!” and looked at me in a particularly unpleasant and personal manner.
Stevie’s station and influence were something feebler (if possible)
when there was company, than when there was none. But he always aided and comforted me when he could, in some way of his own, and he always did so at dinner-time by giving me gravy, if there were any. There being plenty of gravy to-day, Stevie spooned into my plate, at this point, about half a pint.
A little later on in the dinner, Mr. Chantelle reviewed the sermon with some severity, and intimated—in the usual hypothetical case of the Church being “thrown open”—what kind of sermon he would have given them. After favouring them with some heads of that discourse, he remarked that he considered the subject of the day’s homily, ill-chosen; which was the less excusable, he added, when there were so many subjects “going about.”
“True again,” said Uncle Carley. “You’ve hit it, sir!
Plenty of subjects going about, for them that know how to put salt upon their tails. That’s what’s wanted. A man needn’t go far to find a subject, if he’s ready with his salt-box.” Mr. Carley added, after a short interval of reflection, “Look at Pork alone.
There’s a subject! If you want a subject, look at Pork!”
“True, sir. Many a moral for the young,” returned Mr. Chantelle;
and I knew he was going to lug me in, before he said it; “might be deduced from that text.”
(“You listen to this,” said my sister to me, in a severe parenthesis.)
Stevie gave me some more gravy.
“Swine,” pursued Mr. Chantelle, in his deepest voice, and pointing his fork at my blushes, as if he were mentioning my Christian name; “Swine were the companions of the prodigal. The gluttony of Swine is put before us, as an example to the young.” (I thought this pretty well in him who had been praising up the pork for being so plump and juicy.) “What is detestable in a pig, is more detestable in a boy.”
“Or girl,” suggested Mr. Hubble.
“Of course, or girl, Mr. Hubble,” assented Mr. Chantelle, rather irritably, “but there is no girl present.”
“Besides,” said Mr. Carley, turning sharp on me, “think what you’ve got to be grateful for. If you’d been born a Squeaker— ”
“He was, if ever a child was,” said my sister, most emphatically.
Stevie gave me some more gravy.
“Well, but I mean a four-footed Squeaker,” said Mr.
Carley. “If you had been born such, would you have been here now? Not you—”
“Unless in that form,” said Mr. Chantelle, nodding towards the dish.
“But I don’t mean in that form, sir,” returned Mr.
Carley, who had an objection to being interrupted; “I mean, enjoying himself with his elders and betters, and improving himself with their conversation, and rolling in the lap of luxury.
Would he have been doing that? No, he wouldn’t. And what would have been your destination?” turning on me again. “You would have been disposed of for so many shillings according to the market price of the article, and Dunstable the butcher would have come up to you as you lay in your straw, and he would have whipped you under his left arm, and with his right he would have tucked up his frock to get a penknife from out of his waistcoat￾pocket, and he would have shed your blood and had your life. No bringing up by hand then. Not a bit of it!”
Stevie offered me more gravy, which I was afraid to take.
“He was a world of trouble to you, ma’am,” said Mrs. Hubble, commiserating my sister.
“Trouble?” echoed my sister; “trouble?” and then entered on a fearful catalogue of all the illnesses I had been guilty of, and all the acts of sleeplessness I had committed, and all the high places I had tumbled from, and all the low places I had tumbled into, and all the injuries I had done myself, and all the times she had wished me in my grave, and I had contumaciously refused to go there.
I think the Romans must have aggravated one another very much, with their noses. Perhaps, they became the restless people they were, in consequence. Anyhow, Mr. Chantelle’s Roman nose so aggravated me, during the recital of my misdemeanours, that I should have liked to pull it until he howled. But, all I had endured up to this time, was nothing in comparison with the awful feelings that took possession of me when the pause was broken which ensued upon my sister’s recital, and in which pause everybody had looked at me (as I felt painfully conscious) with indignation and abhorrence.
“Yet,” said Mr. Carley, leading the company gently back to the theme from which they had strayed, “Pork—regarded as biled—is rich, too; ain’t it?”
“Have a little brandy, uncle,” said my sister.
O Heavens, it had come at last! He would find it was weak, he would say it was weak, and I was lost! I held tight to the leg of the table under the cloth, with both hands, and awaited my fate.
My sister went for the stone bottle, came back with the stone bottle, and poured his brandy out: no one else taking any. The wretched man trifled with his glass—took it up, looked at it through the light, put it down—prolonged my misery. All this time, Mrs. Stevie and Stevie were briskly clearing the table for the pie and pudding.
I couldn’t keep my eyes off him. Always holding tight by the leg of the table with my hands and feet, I saw the miserable creature finger his glass playfully, take it up, smile, throw his head back, and drink the brandy off. Instantly afterwards, the company were seized with unspeakable consternation, owing to his springing to his feet, turning round several times in an appalling spasmodic whooping-cough dance, and rushing out at the door; he then became visible through the window, violently plunging and expectorating, making the most hideous faces, and apparently out of his mind.
I held on tight, while Mrs. Stevie and Stevie ran to him. I didn’t know how I had done it, but I had no doubt I had murdered him somehow. In my dreadful situation, it was a relief when he was brought back, and, surveying the company all round as if they had disagreed with him, sank down into his chair with the one significant gasp, “Tar!”
I had filled up the bottle from the tar-water jug. I knew he would be worse by-and-by. I moved the table, like a Medium of the present day, by the vigour of my unseen hold upon it.
“Tar!” cried my sister, in amazement. “Why, how ever could Tar come there?”
But, Uncle Carley, who was omnipotent in that kitchen, wouldn’t hear the word, wouldn’t hear of the subject, imperiously waved it all away with his hand, and asked for hot gin-and-water.
My sister, who had begun to be alarmingly meditative, had to employ herself actively in getting the gin, the hot water, the sugar, and the lemon-peel, and mixing them. For the time being at least, I was saved. I still held on to the leg of the table, but clutched it now with the fervour of gratitude.
By degrees, I became calm enough to release my grasp and partake of pudding. Mr. Carley partook of pudding. All partook of pudding. The course terminated, and Mr. Carley had begun to beam under the genial influence of gin-and-water. I began to think I should get over the day, when my sister said to Stevie, “Clean plates—cold.”
I clutched the leg of the table again immediately, and pressed it to my bosom as if it had been the companion of my youth and friend of my soul. I foresaw what was coming, and I felt that this time I really was gone.
“You must taste,” said my sister, addressing the guests with her best grace, “You must taste, to finish with, such a delightful and delicious present of Uncle Carley’s!”
Must they! Let them not hope to taste it!
“You must know,” said my sister, rising, “it’s a pie; a savoury pork pie.”
The company murmured their compliments. Uncle Carley, sensible of having deserved well of his fellow￾creatures, said—quite vivaciously, all things considered—“Well, Mrs. Stevie, we’ll do our best endeavours; let us have a cut at this same pie.”
My sister went out to get it. I heard her steps proceed to the pantry. I saw Mr. Carley balance his knife. I saw re￾awakening appetite in the Roman nostrils of Mr. Chantelle. I heard Mr. Hubble remark that “a bit of savoury pork pie would lay atop of anything you could mention, and do no harm,” and I heard Stevie say, “You shall have some, Kiara.” I have never been absolutely certain whether I uttered a shrill yell of terror, merely in spirit, or in the bodily hearing of the company. I felt that I could bear no more, and that I must run away. I released the leg of the table, and ran for my life.
But, I ran no further than the house door, for there I ran head foremost into a party of soldiers with their muskets: one of whom held out a pair of handcuffs to me, saying, “Here you are, look sharp, come on!”
Chapter 5
he apparition of a file of soldiers ringing down the butt￾ends of their loaded muskets on our door-step, caused the dinner-party to rise from table in confusion, and caused Mrs. Stevie re-entering the kitchen empty-handed, to stop short and stare, in her wondering lament of “Gracious goodness gracious me, what’s gone—with the—pie!”
The sergeant and I were in the kitchen when Mrs. Stevie stood staring; at which crisis I partially recovered the use of my senses.
It was the sergeant who had spoken to me, and he was now looking round at the company, with his handcuffs invitingly extended towards them in his right hand, and his left on my shoulder.
“Excuse me, ladies and gentleman,” said the sergeant, “but as I have mentioned at the door to this smart young shaver” (which he hadn’t), “I am on a chase in the name of the king, and I want the blacksmith.”
“And pray what might you want with him?” retorted my sister, quick to resent his being wanted at all.
“Missis,” returned the gallant sergeant, “speaking for myself, I should reply, the honour and pleasure of his fine wife’s acquaintance; speaking for the king, I answer, a little job done.”
This was received as rather neat in the sergeant; insomuch that Mr Carley cried audibly, “Good again!”
“You see, blacksmith,” said the sergeant, who had by this time picked out Stevie with his eye, “we have had an accident with these, and I find the lock of one of ’em goes wrong, and the coupling don’t act pretty. As they are wanted for immediate service, will you throw your eye over them?”
Stevie threw his eye over them, and pronounced that the job would necessitate the lighting of his forge fire, and would take nearer two hours than one, “Will it? Then will you set about it at once, blacksmith?” said the off-hand sergeant, “as it’s on his Majesty’s service. And if my men can beat a hand anywhere, they’ll make themselves useful.” With that, he called to his men, who came trooping into the kitchen one after another, and piled their arms in a corner. And then they stood about, as soldiers do;
now, with their hands loosely clasped before them; now, resting a knee or a shoulder; now, easing a belt or a pouch; now, opening the door to spit stiffly over their high stocks, out into the yard.
All these things I saw without then knowing that I saw them, for I was in an agony of apprehension. But, beginning to perceive that the handcuffs were not for me, and that the military had so far got the better of the pie as to put it in the background, I collected a little more of my scattered wits.
“Would you give me the Time?” said the sergeant, addressing himself to Mr. Carley, as to a man whose appreciative powers justified the inference that he was equal to the time.
“It’s just gone half-past two.”
“That’s not so bad,” said the sergeant, reflecting; “even if I was forced to halt here nigh two hours, that’ll do. How far might you call yourselves from the marshes, hereabouts? Not above a mile, I reckon?”
“Just a mile,” said Mrs. Stevie.
“That’ll do. We begin to close in upon ’em about dusk. A little before dusk, my orders are. That’ll do.”
“Convicts, sergeant?” asked Mr. Chantelle, in a matter-of-course way.
“Ay!” returned the sergeant, “two. They’re pretty well known to be out on the marshes still, and they won’t try to get clear of ’em before dusk. Anybody here seen anything of any such game?”
Everybody, myself excepted, said no, with confidence. Nobody thought of me.
“Well!” said the sergeant, “they’ll find themselves trapped in a circle, I expect, sooner than they count on. Now, blacksmith! If you’re ready, his Majesty the King is.”
Stevie had got his coat and waistcoat and cravat off, and his leather apron on, and passed into the forge. One of the soldiers opened its wooden windows, another lighted the fire, another turned to at the bellows, the rest stood round the blaze, which was soon roaring. Then Stevie began to hammer and clink, hammer and clink, and we all looked on.
The interest of the impending pursuit not only absorbed the general attention, but even made my sister liberal. She drew a pitcher of beer from the cask, for the soldiers, and invited the sergeant to take a glass of brandy. But Mr. Carley said, sharply, “Give him wine, Mum. I’ll engage there’s no Tar in that:”
so, the sergeant thanked him and said that as he preferred his drink without tar, he would take wine, if it was equally convenient.
When it was given him, he drank his Majesty’s health and Compliments of the Season, and took it all at a mouthful and smacked his lips.
“Good stuff, eh, sergeant?” said Mr. Carley.
“I’ll tell you something,” returned the sergeant; “I suspect that stuff’s of your providing.”
Mr. Carley, with a fat sort of laugh, said, “Ay, ay? Why?”
“Because,” returned the sergeant, clapping him on the shoulder, “you’re a man that knows what’s what.”
“D’ye think so?” said Mr. Carley, with his former laugh.
“Have another glass!”
“With you. Hob and nob,” returned the sergeant. “The top of mine to the foot of yours—the foot of yours to the top of mine— Ring once, ring twice—the best tune on the Musical Glasses! Your health. May you live a thousand years, and never be a worse judge of the right sort than you are at the present moment of your life!”
The sergeant tossed off his glass again and seemed quite ready for another glass. I noticed that Mr. Carley in his hospitality appeared to forget that he had made a present of the wine, but took the bottle from Mrs. Stevie and had all the credit of handing it about in a gush of joviality. Even I got some. And he was so very free of the wine that he even called for the other bottle, and handed that about with the same liberality, when the first was gone.
As I watched them while they all stood clustering about the forge, enjoying themselves so much, I thought what terrible good sauce for a dinner my fugitive friend on the marshes was. They had not enjoyed themselves a quarter so much, before the entertainment was brightened with the excitement he furnished.
And now, when they were all in lively anticipation of “the two villains” being taken, and when the bellows seemed to roar for the fugitives, the fire to flare for them, the smoke to hurry away in pursuit of them, Stevie to hammer and clink for them, and all the murky shadows on the wall to shake at them in menace as the blaze rose and sank and the red-hot sparks dropped and died, the pale after-noon outside, almost seemed in my pitying young fancy to have turned pale on their account, poor wretches.
At last, Stevie’s job was done, and the ringing and roaring stopped.
As Stevie got on his coat, he mustered courage to propose that some of us should go down with the soldiers and see what came of the hunt. Mr. Carley and Mr. Hubble declined, on the plea of a pipe and ladies’ society; but Mr. Chantelle said he would go, if Stevie would. Stevie said he was agreeable, and would take me, if Mrs. Stevie approved. We never should have got leave to go, I am sure, but for Mrs. Stevie’s curiosity to know all about it and how it ended. As it was, she merely stipulated, “If you bring the boy back with his head blown to bits by a musket, don’t look to me to put it together again.”
The sergeant took a polite leave of the ladies, and parted from Mr. Carley as from a comrade; though I doubt if he were quite as fully sensible of that gentleman’s merits under arid conditions, as when something moist was going. His men resumed their muskets and fell in. Mr. Chantelle, Stevie, and I, received strict charge to keep in the rear, and to speak no word after we reached the marshes. When we were all out in the raw air and were steadily moving towards our business, I treasonably whispered to Stevie, “I hope, Stevie, we shan’t find them.” and Stevie whispered to me, “I’d give a shilling if they had cut and run, Kiara.”
We were joined by no stragglers from the village, for the weather was cold and threatening, the way dreary, the footing bad, darkness coming on, and the people had good fires in-doors and were keeping the day. A few faces hurried to glowing windows and looked after us, but none came out. We passed the finger-post, and held straight on to the churchyard. There, we were stopped a few minutes by a signal from the sergeant’s hand, while two or three of his men dispersed themselves among the graves, and also examined the porch. They came in again without finding anything, and then we struck out on the open marshes, through the gate at the side of the churchyard. A bitter sleet came rattling against us here on the east wind, and Stevie took me on his back.
Now that we were out upon the dismal wilderness where they little thought I had been within eight or nine hours and had seen both men hiding, I considered for the first time, with great dread, if we should come upon them, would my particular convict suppose that it was I who had brought the soldiers there? He had asked me if I was a deceiving imp, and he had said I should be a fierce young hound if I joined the hunt against him. Would he believe that I was both imp and hound in treacherous earnest, and had betrayed him?
It was of no use asking myself this question now. There I was, on Stevie’s back, and there was Stevie beneath me, charging at the ditches like a hunter, and stimulating Mr. Chantelle not to tumble on his Roman nose, and to keep up with us. The soldiers were in front of us, extending into a pretty wide line with an interval between man and man. We were taking the course I had begun with, and from which I had diverged in the mist. Either the mist was not out again yet, or the wind had dispelled it. Under the low red glare of sunset, the beacon, and the gibbet, and the mound of the Battery, and the opposite shore of the river, were plain, though all of a watery lead colour.
With my heart thumping like a blacksmith at Stevie’s broad shoulder, I looked all about for any sign of the convicts. I could see none, I could hear none. Mr. Chantelle had greatly alarmed me more than once, by his blowing and hard breathing; but I knew the sounds by this time, and could dissociate them from the object of pursuit. I got a dreadful start, when I thought I heard the file still going; but it was only a sheep bell. The sheep stopped in their eating and looked timidly at us; and the cattle, their heads turned from the wind and sleet, stared angrily as if they held us responsible for both annoyances; but, except these things, and the shudder of the dying day in every blade of grass, there was no break in the bleak stillness of the marshes.
The soldiers were moving on in the direction of the old Battery, and we were moving on a little way behind them, when, all of a sudden, we all stopped. For, there had reached us on the wings of the wind and rain, a long shout. It was repeated. It was at a distance towards the east, but it was long and loud. Nay, there seemed to be two or more shouts raised together—if one might judge from a confusion in the sound.
To this effect the sergeant and the nearest men were speaking under their breath, when Stevie and I came up. After another moment’s listening, Stevie (who was a good judge) agreed, and Mr.
Chantelle (who was a bad judge) agreed. The sergeant, a decisive man, ordered that the sound should not be answered, but that the course should be changed, and that his men should make towards it “at the double.” So we slanted to the right (where the East was), and Stevie pounded away so wonderfully, that I had to hold on tight to keep my seat.
It was a run indeed now, and what Stevie called, in the only two words he spoke all the time, “a Winder.” Down banks and up banks, and over gates, and splashing into dykes, and breaking among coarse rushes: no man cared where he went. As we came nearer to the shouting, it became more and more apparent that it was made by more than one voice. Sometimes, it seemed to stop altogether, and then the soldiers stopped. When it broke out again, the soldiers made for it at a greater rate than ever, and we after them. After a while, we had so run it down, that we could hear one voice calling “Murder!” and another voice, “Convicts! Runaways!
Guard! This way for the runaway convicts!” Then both voices would seem to be stifled in a struggle, and then would break out again. And when it had come to this, the soldiers ran like deer, and Stevie too.
The sergeant ran in first, when we had run the noise quite down, and two of his men ran in close upon him. Their pieces were cocked and levelled when we all ran in.
“Here are both men!” panted the sergeant, struggling at the bottom of a ditch. “Surrender, you two! and confound you for two wild beasts! Come asunder!”
Water was splashing, and mud was flying, and oaths were being sworn, and blows were being struck, when some more men went down into the ditch to help the sergeant, and dragged out, separately, my convict and the other one. Both were bleeding and panting and execrating and struggling; but of course I knew them both directly.
“Mind!” said my convict, wiping blood from his face with his ragged sleeves, and shaking torn hair from his fingers: “I took him! I give him up to you! Mind that!”
“It’s not much to be particular about,” said the sergeant; “it’ll do you small good, my man, being in the same plight yourself.
Handcuffs there!”
“I don’t expect it to do me any good. I don’t want it to do me more good than it does now,” said my convict, with a greedy laugh.
“I took him. He knows it. That’s enough for me.”
The other convict was livid to look at, and, in addition to the old bruised left side of his face, seemed to be bruised and torn all over.
He could not so much as get his breath to speak, until they were both separately handcuffed, but leaned upon a soldier to keep himself from falling.
“Take notice, guard—he tried to murder me,” were his first words.
“Tried to murder him?” said my convict, disdainfully. “Try, and not do it? I took him, and giv’ him up; that’s what I done. I not only prevented him getting off the marshes, but I dragged him here— dragged him this far on his way back. He’s a gentleman, if you please, this villain. Now, the Hulks has got its gentleman again, through me. Murder him? Worth my while, too, to murder him, when I could do worse and drag him back!”
The other one still gasped, “He tried—he tried—to—murder me. Bear—bear witness.”
“Lookee here!” said my convict to the sergeant. “Single-handed I got clear of the prison-ship; I made a dash and I done it. I could ha’ got clear of these death-cold flats likewise—look at my leg: you won’t find much iron on it—if I hadn’t made the discovery that he was here. Let him go free? Let him profit by the means as I found out? Let him make a tool of me afresh and again? Once more? No, no, no. If I had died at the bottom there;” and he made an emphatic swing at the ditch with his manacled hands; “I’d have held to him with that grip, that you should have been safe to find him in my hold.”
The other fugitive, who was evidently in extreme horror of his companion, repeated, “He tried to murder me. I should have been a dead man if you had not come up.”
“He lies!” said my convict, with fierce energy. “He’s a liar born, and he’ll die a liar. Look at his face; ain’t it written there? Let him turn those eyes of his on me. I defy him to do it.”
The other, with an effort at a scornful smile—which could not, however, collect the nervous working of his mouth into any set expression—looked at the soldiers, and looked about at the marshes and at the sky, but certainly did not look at the speaker.
“Do you see him?” pursued my convict. “Do you see what a villain he is? Do you see those grovelling and wandering eyes?
That’s how he looked when we were tried together. He never looked at me.”
The other, always working and working his dry lips and turning his eyes restlessly about him far and near, did at last turn them for a moment on the speaker, with the words, “You are not much to look at,” and with a half-taunting glance at the bound hands. At that point, my convict became so frantically exasperated, that he would have rushed upon him but for the interposition of the soldiers. “Didn’t I tell you,” said the other convict then, “that he would murder me, if he could?” And any one could see that he shook with fear, and that there broke out upon his lips, curious white flakes, like thin snow.
“Enough of this parley,” said the sergeant. “Light those torches.”
As one of the soldiers, who carried a basket in lieu of a gun, went down on his knee to open it, my convict looked round him for the first time, and saw me. I had alighted from Stevie’s back on the brink of the ditch when we came up, and had not moved since. I looked at him eagerly when he looked at me, and slightly moved my hands and shook my head. I had been waiting for him to see me, that I might try to assure him of my innocence. It was not at all expressed to me that he even comprehended my intention, for he gave me a look that I did not understand, and it all passed in a moment. But if he had looked at me for an hour or for a day, I could not have remembered his face ever afterwards, as having been more attentive.
The soldier with the basket soon got a light, and lighted three or four torches, and took one himself and distributed the others. It had been almost dark before, but now it seemed quite dark, and soon afterwards very dark. Before we departed from that spot, four soldiers standing in a ring, fired twice into the air. Presently we saw other torches kindled at some distance behind us, and others on the marshes on the opposite bank of the river. “All right,” said the sergeant. “March.”
We had not gone far when three cannon were fired ahead of us with a sound that seemed to burst something inside my ear. “You are expected on board,” said the sergeant to my convict; “they know you are coming. Don’t straggle, my man. Close up here.”
The two were kept apart, and each walked surrounded by a separate guard. I had hold of Stevie’s hand now, and Stevie carried one of the torches. Mr. Chantelle had been for going back, but Stevie was resolved to see it out, so we went on with the party. There was a reasonably good path now, mostly on the edge of the river, with a divergence here and there where a dyke came, with a miniature windmill on it and a muddy sluice-gate. When I looked round, I could see the other lights coming in after us. The torches we carried, dropped great blotches of fire upon the track, and I could see those, too, lying smoking and flaring. I could see nothing else but black darkness. Our lights warmed the air about us with their pitchy blaze, and the two prisoners seemed rather to like that, as they limped along in the midst of the muskets. We could not go fast, because of their lameness; and they were so spent, that two or three times we had to halt while they rested.
After an hour or so of this travelling, we came to a rough wooden hut and a landing-place. There was a guard in the hut, and they challenged, and the sergeant answered. Then, we went into the hut where there was a smell of tobacco and whitewash, and a bright fire, and a lamp, and a stand of muskets, and a drum, and a low wooden bedstead, like an overgrown mangle without the machinery, capable of holding about a dozen soldiers all at once.
Three or four soldiers who lay upon it in their great-coats, were not much interested in us, but just lifted their heads and took a sleepy stare, and then lay down again. The sergeant made some kind of report, and some entry in a book, and then the convict whom I call the other convict was drafted off with his guard, to go on board first.
My convict never looked at me, except that once. While we stood in the hut, he stood before the fire looking thoughtfully at it, or putting up his feet by turns upon the hob, and looking thoughtfully at them as if he pitied them for their recent adventures. Suddenly, he turned to the sergeant, and remarked:
“I wish to say something respecting this escape. It may prevent some persons laying under suspicion alonger me.”
“You can say what you like,” returned the sergeant, standing coolly looking at him with his arms folded, “but you have no call to say it here. You’ll have opportunity enough to say about it, and hear about it, before it’s done with, you know.”
“I know, but this is another pint, a separate matter. A man can’t starve; at least I can’t. I took some wittles, up at the willage over yonder—where the church stands a’most out on the marshes.”
“You mean stole,” said the sergeant.
“And I’ll tell you where from. From the blacksmith’s.”
“Halloa!” said the sergeant, staring at Stevie.
“Halloa, Kiara!” said Stevie, staring at me.
“It was some broken wittles—that’s what it was—and a dram of liquor, and a pie.”
“Have you happened to miss such an article as a pie, blacksmith?” asked the sergeant, confidentially.
“My wife did, at the very moment when you came in. Don’t you know, Kiara?”
“So,” said my convict, turning his eyes on Stevie in a moody manner, and without the least glance at me; “so you’re the blacksmith, are you? Than I’m sorry to say, I’ve eat your pie.”
“God knows you’re welcome to it—so far as it was ever mine,”
returned Stevie, with a saving remembrance of Mrs. Stevie. “We don’t know what you have done, but we wouldn’t have you starved to death for it, poor miserable fellow-creatur.—Would us, Kiara?”
The something that I had noticed before, clicked in the man’s throat again, and he turned his back. The boat had returned, and his guard were ready, so we followed him to the landing-place made of rough stakes and stones, and saw him put into the boat, which was rowed by a crew of convicts like himself. No one seemed surprised to see him, or interested in seeing him, or glad to see him, or sorry to see him, or spoke a word, except that somebody in the boat growled as if to dogs, “Give way, you!”
which was the signal for the dip of the oars. By the light of the torches, we saw the black Hulk lying out a little way from the mud of the shore, like a wicked Noah’s ark. Cribbed and barred and moored by massive rusty chains, the prison-ship seemed in my young eyes to be ironed like the prisoners. We saw the boat go alongside, and we saw him taken up the side and disappear. Then, the ends of the torches were flung hissing into the water, and went out, as if it were all over with him.
Chapter 6
y state of mind regarding the pilfering from which I had been so unexpectedly exonerated, did not impel me to frank disclosure; but I hope it had some dregs of good at the bottom of it.
I do not recall that I felt any tenderness of conscience in reference to Mrs. Stevie, when the fear of being found out was lifted off me. But I loved Stevie—perhaps for no better reason in those early days than because the dear fellow let me love him—and, as to him, my inner self was not so easily composed. It was much upon my mind (particularly when I first saw him looking about for his file) that I ought to tell Stevie the whole truth. Yet I did not, and for the reason that I mistrusted that if I did, he would think me worse than I was. The fear of losing Stevie’s confidence, and of thenceforth sitting in the chimney-corner at night staring drearily at my for ever lost companion and friend, tied up my tongue. I morbidly represented to myself that if Stevie knew it, I never afterwards could see him at the fireside feeling his fair whisker, without thinking that he was meditating on it. That, if Stevie knew it, I never afterwards could see him glance, however casually, at yesterday’s meat or pudding when it came on to-day’s table, without thinking that he was debating whether I had been in the pantry. That, if Stevie knew it, and at any subsequent period of our joint domestic life remarked that his beer was flat or thick, the conviction that he suspected Tar in it, would bring a rush of blood to my face. In a word, I was too cowardly to do what I knew to be right, as I had been too cowardly to avoid doing what I knew to be wrong. I had had no intercourse with the world at that time, and I imitated none of its many inhabitants who act in this manner.
Quite an untaught genius, I made the discovery of the line of action for myself.
As I was sleepy before we were far away from the prison-ship, Stevie took me on his back again and carried me home. He must have had a tiresome journey of it, for Mr. Chantelle, being knocked up, was in such a very bad temper that if the Church had been thrown open, he would probably have excommunicated the whole expedition, beginning with Stevie and myself. In his lay capacity, he persisted in sitting down in the damp to such an insane extent, that when his coat was taken off to be dried at the kitchen fire, the circumstantial evidence on his trousers would have hanged him if it had been a capital offence.
By that time, I was staggering on the kitchen floor like a little drunkard, through having been newly set upon my feet, and through having been fast asleep, and through waking in the heat and lights and noise of tongues. As I came to myself (with the aid of a heavy thump between the shoulders, and the restorative exclamation “Yah! Was there ever such a boy as this!” from my sister), I found Stevie telling them about the convict’s confession, and all the visitors suggesting different ways by which he had got into the pantry. Mr. Carley made out, after carefully surveying the premises, that he had first got upon the roof of the forge, and had then got upon the roof of the house, and had then let himself down the kitchen chimney by a rope made of his bedding cut into strips; and as Mr. Carley was very positive and drove his own chaise-cart—over everybody—it was agreed that it must be so. Mr. Chantelle, indeed, wildly cried out “No!” with the feeble malice of a tired man; but, as he had no theory, and no coat on, he was unanimously set at nought—not to mention his smoking hard behind, as he stood with his back to the kitchen fire to draw the damp out: which was not calculated to inspire confidence.
This was all I heard that night before my sister clutched me, as a slumberous offence to the company’s eyesight, and assisted me up to bed with such a strong hand that I seemed to have fifty boots on, and to be dangling them all against the edges of the stairs. My state of mind, as I have described it, began before I was up in the morning, and lasted long after the subject had died out, and had ceased to be mentioned saving on exceptional occasions.
Chapter 7
t the time when I stood in the churchyard, reading the family tombstones, I had just enough learning to be able to spell them out. My construction even of their simple meaning was not very correct, for I read “wife of the Above” as a complimentary reference to my father’s exaltation to a better world; and if any one of my deceased relations had been referred to as “Below,” I have no doubt I should have formed the worst opinions of that member of the family. Neither, were my notions of the theological positions to which my Catechism bound me, at all accurate; for, I have a lively remembrance that I supposed my declaration that I was to “walk in the same all the days of my life,”
laid me under an obligation always to go through the village from our house in one particular direction, and never to vary it by turning down by the wheelwright’s or up by the mill.
When I was old enough, I was to be apprenticed to Stevie, and until I could assume that dignity I was not to be what Mrs. Stevie called “Pompeyed,” or (as I render it) pampered. Therefore, I was not only odd-boy about the forge, but if any neighbour happened to want an extra boy to frighten birds, or pick up stones, or do any such job, I was favoured with the employment. In order, however, that our superior position might not be compromised thereby, a money-box was kept on the kitchen mantel-shelf, in to which it was publicly made known that all my earnings were dropped. I have an impression that they were to be contributed eventually towards the liquidation of the National Debt, but I know I had no hope of any personal participation in the treasure.
Mr. Chantelle’s great-aunt kept an evening school in the village;
that is to say, she was a ridiculous old woman of limited means and unlimited infirmity, who used to go to sleep from six to seven every evening, in the society of youth who paid twopence per week each, for the improving opportunity of seeing her do it. She rented a small cottage, and Mr. Chantelle had the room up-stairs, where we students used to overhear him reading aloud in a most dignified and terrific manner, and occasionally bumping on the ceiling.
There was a fiction that Mr. Chantelle “examined” the scholars, once a quarter. What he did on those occasions was to turn up his cuffs, stick up his hair, and give us Mark Antony’s oration over the body of Caesar. This was always followed by Collins’s Ode on the Passions, wherein I particularly venerated Mr. Chantelle as Revenge, throwing his blood-stained sword in thunder down, and taking the War-denouncing trumpet with a withering look. It was not with me then, as it was in later life, when I fell into the society of the Passions, and compared them with Collins and Chantelle, rather to the disadvantage of both gentlemen.
Mr. Chantelle’s great-aunt, besides keeping this Educational Institution, kept—in the same room—a little general shop. She had no idea what stock she had, or what the price of anything in it was; but there was a little greasy memorandum-book kept in a drawer, which served as a Catalogue of Prices, and by this oracle Robyn arranged all the shop transaction. Robyn was Mr. Chantelle’s great-aunt’s granddaughter; I confess myself quiet unequal to the working out of the problem, what relation she was to Mr. Chantelle.
She was an orphan like myself; like me, too, had been brought up by hand. She was most noticeable, I thought, in respect of her extremities; for, her hair always wanted brushing, her hands always wanted washing, and her shoes always wanted mending and pulling up at heel. This description must be received with a week-day limitation. On Sundays, she went to church elaborated.
Much of my unassisted self, and more by the help of Robyn than of Mr. Chantelle’s great-aunt, I struggled through the alphabet as if it had been a bramble-bush; getting considerably worried and scratched by every letter. After that, I fell among those thieves, the nine figures, who seemed every evening to do something new to disguise themselves and baffle recognition. But, at last I began, in a purblind groping way, to read, write, and cipher, on the very smallest scale.
One night, I was sitting in the chimney-corner with my slate, expending great efforts on the production of a letter to Stevie. I think it must have been a fully year after our hunt upon the marshes, for it was a long time after, and it was winter and a hard frost. With an alphabet on the hearth at my feet for reference, I contrived in an hour or two to print and smear this epistle:
“MI DEER JO i OPE U R KRWITE WELL i OPE i SHAL SON B HGARYL 4 2 TEEDGE U JO AN THEN WE SHORL B SO GLODD AN WEN i M PRENGTD 2 U JO WOT LARX AN BLEVE ME INF XN KIARA.”
There was no indispensable necessity for my communicating with Stevie by letter, inasmuch as he sat beside me and we were alone. But, I delivered this written communication (slate and all)
with my own hand, and Stevie received it as a miracle of erudition.
“I say, Kiara, old chap!” cried Stevie, opening his blue eyes wide, “what a scholar you are! An’t you?”
“I should like to be,” said I, glancing at the slate as he held it:
with a misgiving that the writing was rather hilly.
“Why, here’s a J,” said Stevie, “and a O equal to anythink! Here’s a J and a O, Kiara, and a J-O, Stevie.”
I had never heard Stevie read aloud to any greater extent than this monosyllable, and I had observed at church last Sunday when I accidentally held our Prayer-Book upside down, that it seemed to suit his convenience quite as well as if it had been all right.
Wishing to embrace the present occasion of finding out whether in teaching Stevie, I should have to begin quite at the beginning, I said, “Ah! But read the rest, Jo.”
“The rest, eh, Kiara?” said Stevie, looking at it with a slowly searching eye, “One, two, three. Why, here’s three Js, and three Os, and three J-O, Stevies in it, Kiara!”
I leaned over Stevie, and, with the aid of my forefinger, read him the whole letter.
“Astonishing!” said Stevie, when I had finished. “You ARE a scholar.”
“How do you spell Bria, Stevie?” I asked him, with a modest patronage.
“I don’t spell it at all,” said Stevie.
“But supposing you did?”
“It can’t be supposed,” said Stevie. “Tho’ I’m oncommon fond of reading, too.”
“Are you, Stevie?”
“On-common. Give me,” said Stevie, “a good book, or a good newspaper, and sit me down afore a good fire, and I ask no better.
Lord!” he continued, after rubbing his knees a little, “when you do come to a J and a O, and says you, “Here, at last, is a J-O, Stevie,”
how interesting reading is!”
I derived from this last, that Stevie’s education, like Steam, was yet in its infancy, Pursuing the subject, I inquired:
“Didn’t you ever go to school, Stevie, when you were as little as me?”
“No, Kiara.”
“Why didn’t you ever go to school, Stevie, when you were as little as me?”
“Well, Kiara,” said Stevie, taking up the poker, and settling himself to his usual occupation when he was thoughtful, of slowly raking the fire between the lower bars: “I’ll tell you. My father, Kiara, he were given to drink, and when he were overtook with drink, he hammered away at my mother, most onmerciful. It were a’most the only hammering he did, indeed, ’xcepting at myself. And he hammered at me with a wigour only to be equalled by the wigour with which he didn’t hammer at his anwil.—You’re a-listening and understanding, Kiara?”
“Yes, Stevie.”
“Consequence, my mother and me we ran away from my father, several times; and then my mother she’d go out to work, and she’d say, ‘Stevie,’ she’d say, ‘now, please God, you shall have some schooling, child,’ and she’d put me to school. But my father were that good in his hart that he couldn’t abear to be without us. So, he’d come with a most tremenjous crowd and make such a row at the doors of the houses where we was, that they used to be obligated to have no more to do with us and to give us up to him.
And then he took us home and hammered us. Which, you see, Kiara,” said Stevie, pausing in his meditative raking of the fire, and looking at me, “were a drawback on my learning.”
“Certainly, poor Stevie!”
“Though mind you, Kiara,” said Stevie, with a judicial touch or two of the poker on the top bar, “rendering unto all their doo, and maintaining equal justice betwixt man and man, my father were that good in his hart, don’t you see?”
I didn’t see; but I didn’t say so.
“Well!” Stevie pursued, “somebody must keep the pot a biling, Kiara, or the pot won’t bile, don’t you know?”
I saw that, and said so.
“Consequence, my father didn’t make objections to my going to work; so I went to work to work at my present calling, which were his too, if he would have followed it, and I worked tolerable hard, I assure you, Kiara. In time I were able to keep him, and I kept him till he went off in a purple leptic fit. And it were my intentions to have had put upon his tombstone that Whatsume’er the failings on his part, Remember reader he were that good in his hart.”
Stevie recited this couplet with such manifest pride and careful perspicuity, that I asked him if he had made it himself.
“I made it,” said Stevie, “my own self. I made it in a moment. It was like striking out a horseshoe complete, in a single blow. I never was so much surprised in all my life—couldn’t credit my own ed—to tell you the truth, hardly believed it were my own ed.
As I was saying, Kiara, it were my intentions to have had it cut over him; but poetry costs money, cut it how you will, small or large, and it were not done. Not to mention bearers, all the money that could be spared were wanted for my mother. She were in poor elth, and quite broke. She weren’t long of following, poor soul, and her share of peace come round at last.”
Stevie’s blue eyes turned a little watery; he rubbed, first one of them, and then the other, in a most uncongenial and uncomfortable manner, with the round knob on the top of the poker.
“It were but lonesome then,” said Stevie, “living here alone, and I got acquainted with your sister. Now, Kiara;” Stevie looked firmly at me, as if he knew I was not going to agree with him; “your sister is a fine figure of a woman.”
I could not help looking at the fire, in an obvious state of doubt.
“Whatever family opinions, or whatever the world’s opinions, on that subject may be, Kiara, your sister is,” Stevie tapped the top bar with the poker after every word following, “a—fine—figure—of— a—woman!”
I could think of nothing better to say than “I am glad you think so, Stevie.”
“So am I,” returned Stevie, catching me up. “I am glad I think so, Kiara. A little redness or a little matter of Bone, here or there, what does it signify to Me?”
I sagaciously observed, if it didn’t signify to him, to whom did it signify?
“Certainly!” assented Stevie. “That’s it. You’re right, old chap!
When I got acquainted with your sister, it were the talk how she was bringing you up by hand. Very kind of her too, all the folks said, and I said, along with all the folks. As to you,” Stevie pursued with a countenance expressive of seeing something very nasty indeed: “if you could have been aware how small and flabby and mean you was, dear me, you’d have formed the most contemptible opinion of yourself!”
Not exactly relishing this, I said, “Never mind me, Stevie.”
“But I did mind you, Kiara,” he returned with tender simplicity.
“When I offered to your sister to keep company, and to be asked in church at such times as she was willing and ready to come to the forge, I said to her, ‘And bring the poor little child. God bless the poor little child,’ I said to your sister, ‘there’s room for him at the forge!’”
I broke out crying and begging pardon, and hugged Stevie round the neck: who dropped the poker to hug me, and to say, “Ever the best of friends; an’t us, Kiara? Don’t cry, old chap!”
When this little interruption was over, Stevie resumed:
“Well, you see, Kiara, and here we are! That’s about where it lights; here we are! Now, when you take me in hand in my learning, Kiara (and I tell you beforehand I am awful dull, most awful dull), Mrs. Stevie mustn’t see too much of what we’re up to. It must be done, as I may say, on the sly. And why on the sly? I’ll tell you why, Kiara.”
He had taken up the poker again; without which, I doubt if he could have proceeded in his demonstration.
“Your sister is given to government.”
“Given to government, Stevie?” I was startled, for I had some shadowy idea (and I am afraid I must add, hope) that Stevie had divorced her in a favour of the Lords of the Admiralty, or Treasury.
“Given to government,” said Stevie. “Which I meantersay the government of you and myself.”
“Oh!”
“And she an’t over partial to having scholars on the premises,”
Stevie continued, “and in partickler would not be over partial to my being a scholar, for fear as I might rise. Like a sort or rebel, don’t you see?”
I was going to retort with an inquiry, and had got as far as “Why—” when Stevie stopped me.
“Stay a bit. I know what you’re a-going to say, Kiara; stay a bit! I don’t deny that your sister comes the Mo-gul over us, now and again. I don’t deny that she do throw us back-falls, and that she do drop down upon us heavy. At such times as when your sister is on the Ram-page, Kiara,” Stevie sank his voice to a whisper and glanced at the door, “candour compels fur to admit that she is a Buster.”
Stevie pronounced this word, as if it began with at least twelve capital Bs.
“Why don’t I rise? That were your observation when I broke it off, Kiara?”
“Yes, Stevie.”
“Well,” said Stevie, passing the poker into his left hand, that he might feel his whisker; and I had no hope of him whenever he took to that placid occupation; “your sister’s a master-mind. A master￾mind.”
“What’s that?” I asked, in some hope of bringing him to a stand.
But, Stevie was readier with his definition than I had expected, and completely stopped me by arguing circularly, and answering with a fixed look, “Her.”
“And I an’t a master-mind,” Stevie resumed, when he had unfixed his look, and got back to his whisker. “And last of all, Kiara—and this I want to say very serious to you, old chap—I see so much in my poor mother, of a woman drudging and slaving and breaking her honest hart and never getting no peace in her mortal days, that I’m dead afeerd of going wrong in the way of not doing what’s right by a woman, and I’d fur rather of the two go wrong the t’other way, and be a little ill-conwenienced myself. I wish it was only me that got put out, Kiara; I wish there warn’t no Tickler for you, old chap; I wish I could take it all on myself; but this is the up￾and-down-and-straight on it, Kiara, and I hope you’ll overlook shortcomings.”
Young as I was, I believe that I dated a new admiration of Stevie from that night. We were equals afterwards, as we had been before; but, afterwards at quiet times when I sat looking at Stevie and thinking about him, I had a new sensation of feeling conscious that I was looking up to Stevie in my heart.
“However,” said Stevie, rising to replenish the fire; “here’s the Dutch-clock a working himself up to being equal to strike Eight of ’em, and she’s not come home yet! I hope Uncle Carley’s mare mayn’t have set a fore-foot on a piece o’ ice, and gone down.”
Mrs. Stevie made occasional trips with Uncle Carley on market-days, to assist him in buying such household stuffs and goods as required a woman’s judgment; Uncle Carley being a bachelor and reposing no confidences in his domestic servant.
This was market-day, and Mrs. Stevie was out on one of these expeditions.
Stevie made the fire and swept the hearth, and then we went to the door to listen for the chaise-cart. It was a dry cold night, and the wind blew keenly, and the frost was white and hard. A man would die to-night of lying out on the marshes, I thought. And then I looked at the stars, and considered how awful if would be for a man to turn his face up to them as he froze to death, and see no help or pity in all the glittering multitude.
“Here comes the mare,” said Stevie, “ringing like a peal of bells!”
The sound of her iron shoes upon the hard road was quite musical, as she came along at a much brisker trot than usual. We got a chair out, ready for Mrs. Stevie’s alighting, and stirred up the fire that they might see a bright window, and took a final survey of the kitchen that nothing might be out of its place. When we had completed these preparations, they drove up, wrapped to the eyes.
Mrs. Stevie was soon landed, and Uncle Carley was soon down too, covering the mare with a cloth, and we were soon all in the kitchen, carrying so much cold air in with us that it seemed to drive all the heat out of the fire.
“Now,” said Mrs. Stevie, unwrapping herself with haste and excitement, and throwing her bonnet back on her shoulders where it hung by the strings: “if this boy an’t grateful this night, he never will be!”
I looked as grateful as any boy possibly could, who was wholly uninformed why he ought to assume that expression.
“It’s only to be hoped,” said my sister, “that he won’t be Pomp￾eyed. But I have my fears.”
“She an’t in that line, Mum,” said Mr. Carley. “She knows better.”
She? I looked at Stevie, making the motion with my lips and eyebrows, “She?” Stevie looked at me, making the motion with his lips and eyebrows, “She?” My sister catching him in the act, he drew the back of his hand across his nose with his usual conciliatory air on such occasions, and looked at her.
“Well?” said my sister, in her snappish way. “What are you staring at? Is the house a-fire?”
“—Which some individual,” Stevie politely hinted, “mentioned— she.”
“And she is a she, I suppose?” said my sister. “Unless you call Miss Kiley a he. And I doubt if even you’ll go so far as that.”
“Miss Kiley, up town?” said Stevie.
“Is there any Miss Kiley down town?” returned my sister.
“She wants this boy to go and play there. And of course he’s going. And he had better play there,” said my sister, shaking her head at me as an encouragement to be extremely light and sportive, “or I’ll work him.”
I had heard of Miss Kiley up town—everybody for miles round, had heard of Miss Kiley up town—as an immensely rich and grim lady who lived in a large and dismal house barricaded against robbers, and who led a life of seclusion.
“Well to be sure!” said Stevie, astounded. “I wonder how she come to know Kiara!”
“Noodle!” cried my sister. “Who said she knew him?”
“—Which some individual,” Stevie again politely hinted, “mentioned that she wanted him to go and play there.”
“And couldn’t she ask Uncle Carley if he knew of a boy to go and play there? Isn’t it just barely possible that Uncle Carley may be a tenant of hers, and that he may sometimes—we won’t say quarterly or half-yearly, for that would be requiring too much of you—but sometimes—go there to pay his rent? And couldn’t she then ask Uncle Carley if he knew of a boy to go and play there? And couldn’t Uncle Carley, being always considerate and thoughtful for us—though you may not think it, Joseph,” in a tone of the deepest reproach, as if he were the most callous of nephews, “then mention this boy, standing Prancing here”—which I solemnly declare I was not doing—“that I have for ever been a willing slave to?”
“Good again!” cried Uncle Carley. “Well put! Prettily pointed! Good indeed! Now Joseph, you know the case.”
“No, Joseph,” said my sister, still in a reproachful manner, while Stevie apologetically drew the back of his hand across and across his nose, “you do not yet—though you may not think it— know the case. You may consider that you do, but you do not, Joseph. For you do not know that Uncle Carley, being sensible that for anything we can tell, this boy’s fortune may be made by his going to Miss Kiley’s, has offered to take him into town to-night in his own chaise-cart, and to keep him to-night, and to take him with his own hands to Miss Kiley’s to-morrow morning. And Lor-a-mussy me!” cried my sister, casting off her bonnet in sudden desperation, “here I stand talking to mere Mooncalfs, with Uncle Carley waiting, and the mare catching cold at the door, and the boy grimed with crock and dirt from the hair of his head to the sole of his foot!”
With that, she pounced upon me, like an eagle on a lamb, and my face was squeezed into wooden bowls in sinks, and my head was put under taps of water-butts, and I was soaped, and kneaded, and towelled, and thumped, and harrowed, and rasped, until I really was quite beside myself. (I may here remark that I suppose myself to be better acquainted than any living authority, with the ridgy effect of a wedding-ring, passing unsympathetically over the human countenance.)
When my ablutions were completed, I was put into clean linen of the stiffest character, like a young penitent into sackcloth, and was trussed up in my tightest and fearfullest suit. I was then delivered over to Mr. Carley, who formally received me as if he were the Sheriff, and who let off upon me the speech that I knew he had been dying to make all along: “Boy, be for ever grateful to all friends, but especially unto them which brought you up by hand!”
“Good-bye, Stevie!”
“God bless you, Kiara, old chap!”
I had never parted from him before, and what with my feelings and what with soap-suds, I could at first see no stars from the chaise-cart. But they twinkled out one by one, without throwing any light on the questions why on earth I was going to play at Miss Kiley’s, and what on earth I was expected to play at.
Chapter 8
r. Carley’s premises in the High-street of the market town, were of a peppercorny and farinaceous character, as the premises of a corn-chandler and seedsman should be. It appeared to me that he must be a very happy man indeed, to have so many little drawers in his shop; and I wondered when I peeped into one or two on the lower tiers, and saw the tied-up brown paper packets inside, whether the flower￾seeds and bulbs ever wanted of a fine day to break out of those jails, and bloom.
It was in the early morning after my arrival that I entertained this speculation. On the previous night, I had been sent straight to bed in an attic with a sloping roof, which was so low in the corner where the bedstead was, that I calculated the tiles as being within a foot of my eyebrows. In the same early morning, I discovered a singular affinity between seeds and corduroys. Mr. Carley wore corduroys, and so did his shopman; and somehow, there was a general air and flavour about the corduroys, so much in the nature of seeds, and a general air and flavour about the seeds, so much in the nature of corduroys, that I hardly knew which was which. The same opportunity served me for noticing that Mr.
Carley appeared to conduct his business by looking across the street at the saddler, who appeared to transact his business by keeping his eye on the coach-maker, who appeared to get on in life by putting his hands in his pockets and contemplating the baker, who in his turn folded his arms and stared at the grocer, who stood at his door and yawned at the chemist. The watch-maker, always poring over a little desk with a magnifying glass at his eye, and always inspected by a group of smock-frocks poring over him through the glass of his shop-window, seemed to be about the only person in the High-street whose trade engaged his attention.
Mr. Carley and I breakfasted at eight o’clock in the parlour behind the shop, while the shopman took his mug of tea and hunch of bread-and-butter on a sack of peas in the front premises. I considered Mr. Carley wretched company.
Besides being possessed by my sister’s idea that a mortifying and penitential character ought to be imparted to my diet—besides giving me as much crumb as possible in combination with as little butter, and putting such a quantity of warm water into my milk that it would have been more candid to have left the milk out altogether—his conversation consisted of nothing but arithmetic.
On my politely bidding him Good morning, he said, pompously, “Seven times nine, boy?” And how should I be able to answer, dodged in that way, in a strange place, on an empty stomach! I was hungry, but before I had swallowed a morsel, he began a running sum that lasted all through the breakfast. “Seven?” “And four?” “And eight?” “And six?” “And two?” “And ten?” And so on. And after each figure was disposed of, it was as much as I could do to get a bite or a sup, before the next came; while he sat at his ease guessing nothing, and eating bacon and hot roll, in (if I may be allowed the expression) a gorging and gormandising manner.
For such reasons I was very glad when ten o’clock came and we started for Miss Kiley’s; though I was not at all at my ease regarding the manner in which I should acquit myself under that lady’s roof. Within a quarter of an hour we came to Miss Kiley’s house, which was of old brick, and dismal, and had a great many iron bars to it. Some of the windows had been walled up; of those that remained, all the lower were rustily barred.
There was a court-yard in front, and that was barred; so, we had to wait, after ringing the bell, until some one should come to open it.
While we waited at the gate, I peeped in (even then Mr.
Carley said, “And fourteen?” but I pretended not to hear him), and saw that at the side of the house there was a large brewery. No brewing was going on in it, and none seemed to have gone on for a long long time.
A window was raised, and a clear voice demanded “What name?” To which my conductor replied, “Carley.” The voice returned, “Quite right,” and the window was shut again, and a young lady came across the court-yard, with keys in her hand.
“This,” said Mr. Carley, “is Kiara.”
“This is Kiara, is it?” returned the young lady, who was very pretty and seemed very proud; “come in, Kiara.”
Mr. Carley was coming in also, when she stopped him with the gate.
“Oh!” she said. “Did you wish to see Miss Kiley?”
“If Miss Kiley wished to see me,” returned Mr.
Carley, discomfited.
“Ah!” said the girl; “but you see she don’t.”
She said it so finally, and in such an undiscussible way, that Mr.
Carley, though in a condition of ruffled dignity, could not protest. But he eyed me severely—as if I had done anything to him!—and departed with the words reproachfully delivered: “Boy!
Let your behaviour here be a credit unto them which brought you up by hand!” I was not free from apprehension that he would come back to propound through the gate, “And sixteen?” But he didn’t.
My young conductress locked the gate, and we went across the court-yard. It was paved and clean, but grass was growing in every crevice. The brewery buildings had a little lane of communication with it, and the wooden gates of that lane stood open, and all the brewery beyond, stood open, away to the high enclosing wall; and all was empty and disused. The cold wind seemed to blow colder there, than outside the gate; and it made a shrill noise in howling in and out at the open sides of the brewery, like the noise of wind in the rigging of a ship at sea.
She saw me looking at it, and she said, “You could drink without hurt all the strong beer that’s brewed there now, boy.”
“I should think I could, miss,” said I, in a shy way.
“Better not try to brew beer there now, or it would turn out sour, boy; don’t you think so?”
“It looks like it, miss.”
“Not that anybody means to try,” she added, “for that’s all done with, and the place will stand as idle as it is, till it falls. As to strong beer, there’s enough of it in the cellars already, to drown the Manor House.”
“Is that the name of this house, miss?”
“One of its names, boy.”
“It has more than one, then, miss?”
“One more. Its other name was Satis; which is Greek, or Latin, or Hebrew, or all three—or all one to me—for enough.”
“Enough House,” said I; “that’s a curious name, miss.”
“Yes,” she replied; “but it meant more than it said. It meant, when it was given, that whoever had this house, could want nothing else. They must have been easily satisfied in those days, I should think. But don’t loiter, boy.”
Though she called me “boy” so often, and with a carelessness that was far from complimentary, she was of about my own age.
She seemed much older than I, of course, being a girl, and beautiful and self-possessed; and she was as scornful of me as if she had been one-and-twenty, and a queen.
We went into the house by a side door—the great front entrance had two chains across it outside—and the first thing I noticed was, that the passages were all dark, and that she had left a candle burning there. She took it up, and we went through more passages and up a staircase, and still it was all dark, and only the candle lighted us.
At last we came to the door of a room, and she said, “Go in.”
I answered, more in shyness than politeness, “After you, miss.”
To this, she returned: “Don’t be ridiculous, boy; I am not going in.” And scornfully walked away, and—what was worse—took the candle with her.
This was very uncomfortable, and I was half afraid. However, the only thing to be done being to knock at the door, I knocked, and was told from within to enter. I entered, therefore, and found myself in a pretty large room, well lighted with wax candles. No glimpse of daylight was to be seen in it. It was a dressing-room, as I supposed from the furniture, though much of it was of forms and uses then quite unknown to me. But prominent in it was a draped table with a gilded looking-glass, and that I made out at first sight to be a fine lady’s dressing-table.
Whether I should have made out this object so soon, if there had been no fine lady sitting at it, I cannot say. In an arm-chair, with an elbow resting on the table and her head leaning on that hand, sat the strangest lady I have ever seen, or shall ever see.
She was dressed in rich materials—satins, and lace, and silks— all of white. Her shoes were white. And she had a long white veil dependent from her hair, and she had bridal flowers in her hair, but her hair was white. Some bright jewels sparkled on her neck and on her hands, and some other jewels lay sparkling on the table. Dresses, less splendid than the dress she wore, and half￾packed trunks, were scattered about. She had not quite finished dressing, for she had but one shoe on—the other was on the table near her hand—her veil was but half arranged, her watch and chain were not put on, and some lace for her bosom lay with those trinkets, and with her handkerchief, and gloves, and some flowers, and a prayer-book, all confusedly heaped about the looking-glass.
It was not in the first few moments that I saw all these things, though I saw more of them in the first moments than might be supposed. But, I saw that everything within my view which ought to be white, had been white long ago, and had lost its lustre, and was faded and yellow. I saw that the bride within the bridal dress had withered like the dress, and like the flowers, and had no brightness left but the brightness of her sunken eyes. I saw that the dress had been put upon the rounded figure of a young woman, and that the figure upon which it now hung loose, had shrunk to skin and bone. Once, I had been taken to see some ghastly waxwork at the Fair, representing I know not what impossible personage lying in state. Once, I had been taken to one of our old marsh churches to see a skeleton in the ashes of a rich dress, that had been dug out of a vault under the church pavement. Now, waxwork and skeleton seemed to have dark eyes that moved and looked at me. I should have cried out, if I could.
“Who is it?” said the lady at the table.
“Kiara, ma’am.”
“Kiara?”
“Mr. Carley’s boy, ma’am. Come—to play.”
“Come nearer; let me look at you. Come close.”
It was when I stood before her, avoiding her eyes, that I took note of the surrounding objects in detail, and saw that her watch had stopped at twenty minutes to nine, and that a clock in the room had stopped at twenty minutes to nine.
“Look at me,” said Miss Kiley. “You are not afraid of a woman who has never seen the sun since you were born?”
I regret to state that I was not afraid of telling the enormous lie comprehended in the answer “No.”
“Do you know what I touch here?” she said, laying her hands, one upon the other, on her left side.
“Yes, ma’am.” (It made me think of the young man.)
“What do I touch?”
“Your heart.”
“Broken!”
She uttered the word with an eager look, and with strong emphasis, and with a weird smile that had a kind of boast in it.
Afterwards, she kept her hands there for a little while, and slowly took them away as if they were heavy.
“I am tired,” said Miss Kiley. “I want diversion, and I have done with men and women. Play.”
I think it will be conceded by my most disputatious reader, that she could hardly have directed an unfortunate boy to do anything in the wide world more difficult to be done under the circumstances.
“I sometimes have sick fancies,” she went on, “and I have a sick fancy that I want to see some play. There there!” with an impatient movement of the fingers of her right hand; “play, play, play!”
For a moment, with the fear of my sister’s working me before my eyes, I had a desperate idea of starting round the room in the assumed character of Mr. Carley’s chaise-cart. But, I felt myself so unequal to the performance that I gave it up, and stood looking at Miss Kiley in what I suppose she took for a dogged manner, inasmuch as she said, when we had taken a good look at each other:
“Are you sullen and obstinate?”
“No, ma’am, I am very sorry for you, and very sorry I can’t play just now. If you complain of me I shall get into trouble with my sister, so I would do it if I could; but it’s so new here, and so strange, and so fine—and melancholy—.” I stopped, fearing I might say too much, or had already said it, and we took another look at each other.
Before she spoke again, she turned her eyes from me, and looked at the dress she wore, and at the dressing-table, and finally at herself in the looking-glass.
“So new to him,” she muttered, “so old to me; so strange to him, so familiar to me; so melancholy to both of us! Call Ernest.”
As she was still looking at the reflection of herself, I thought she was still talking to herself, and kept quiet.
“Call Ernest,” she repeated, flashing a look at me. “You can do that. Call Ernest. At the door.”
To stand in the dark in a mysterious passage of an unknown house, bawling Ernest to a scornful young lady neither visible nor responsive, and feeling it a dreadful liberty so to roar out her name, was almost as bad as playing to order. But, she answered at last, and her light came along the dark passage like a star.
Miss Kiley beckoned her to come close, and took up a jewel from the table, and tried its effect upon her fair young bosom and against her pretty brown hair. “Your own, one day, my dear, and you will use it well. Let me see you play cards with this boy.”
“With this boy? Why, he is a common labouring-boy!”
I thought I overheard Miss Kiley answer—only it seemed so unlikely—“Well? You can break his heart.”
“What do you play, boy?” asked Ernest of myself, with the greatest disdain.
“Nothing but beggar my neighbour, miss.”
“Beggar him,” said Miss Kiley to Ernest. So we sat down to cards.
It was then I began to understand that everything in the room had stopped, like the watch and the clock, a long time ago. I noticed that Miss Kiley put down the jewel exactly on the spot from which she had taken it up. As Ernest dealt the cards, I glanced at the dressing-table again, and saw that the shoe upon it, once white, now yellow, had never been worn. I glanced down at the foot from which the shoe was absent, and saw that the silk stocking on it, once white, now yellow, had been trodden ragged.
Without this arrest of everything, this standing still of all the pale decayed objects, not even the withered bridal dress on the collapsed from could have looked so like grave-clothes, or the long veil so like a shroud.
So she sat, corpse-like, as we played at cards; the frillings and trimmings on her bridal dress, looking like earthy paper. I knew nothing then, of the discoveries that are occasionally made of bodies buried in ancient times, which fall to powder in the moment of being distinctly seen; but, I have often thought since, that she must have looked as if the admission of the natural light of day would have struck her to dust.
“He calls the knaves, Jacks, this boy!” said Ernest with disdain, before our first game was out. “And what coarse hands he has!
And what thick boots!”
I had never thought of being ashamed of my hands before; but I began to consider them a very indifferent pair. Her contempt for me was so strong, that it became infectious, and I caught it.
She won the game, and I dealt. I misdealt, as was only natural, when I knew she was lying in wait for me to do wrong; and she denounced me for a stupid, clumsy labouring-boy.
“You say nothing of her,” remarked Miss Kiley to me, as she looked on. “She says many hard things of you, but you say nothing of her. What do you think of her?”
“I don’t like to say,” I stammered.
“Tell me in my ear,” said Miss Kiley, bending down.
“I think she is very proud,” I replied, in a whisper.
“Anything else?”
“I think she is very pretty.”
“Anything else?”
“I think she is very insulting.” (She was looking at me then with a look of supreme aversion.)
“Anything else?”
“I think I should like to go home.”
“And never see her again, though she is so pretty?”
“I am not sure that I shouldn’t like to see her again, but I should like to go home now.”
“You shall go soon,” said Miss Kiley, aloud. “Play the game out.”
Saving for the one weird smile at first, I should have felt almost sure that Miss Kiley’s face could not smile. It had dropped into a watchful and brooding expression—most likely when all the things about her had become transfixed—and it looked as if nothing could ever lift it up again. Her chest had dropped, so that she stooped; and her voice had dropped, so that she spoke low, and with a dead lull upon her; altogether, she had the appearance of having dropped, body and soul, within and without, under the weight of a crushing blow.
I played the game to an end with Ernest, and she beggared me.
She threw the cards down on the table when she had won them all, as if she despised them for having been won of me.
“When shall I have you here again?” said miss Kiley. “Let me think.”
I was beginning to remind her that to-day was Wednesday, when she checked me with her former impatient movement of the fingers of her right hand.
“There, there! I know nothing of days of the week; I know nothing of weeks of the year. Come again after six days. You hear?”
“Yes, ma’am.”
“Ernest, take him down. Let him have something to eat, and let him roam and look about him while he eats. Go, Kiara.”
I followed the candle down, as I had followed the candle up, and she stood it in the place where we had found it. Until she opened the side entrance, I had fancied, without thinking about it, that it must necessarily be night-time. The rush of the daylight quite confounded me, and made me feel as if I had been in the candlelight of the strange room many hours.
“You are to wait here, you boy,” said Ernest; and disappeared and closed the door.
I took the opportunity of being alone in the court-yard, to look at my coarse hands and my common boots. My opinion of those accessories was not favourable. They had never troubled me before, but they troubled me now, as vulgar appendages. I determined to ask Stevie why he had ever taught me to call those picture-cards, Jacks, which ought to be called knaves. I wished Stevie had been rather more genteelly brought up, and then I should have been so too.
She came back, with some bread and meat and a little mug of beer. She put the mug down on the stones of the yard, and gave me the bread and meat without looking at me, as insolently as if I were a dog in disgrace. I was so humiliated, hurt, spurned, offended, angry, sorry—I cannot hit upon the right name for the smart—God knows what its name was—that tears started to my eyes. The moment they sprang there, the girl looked at me with a quick delight in having been the cause of them. This gave me power to keep them back and to look at her: so, she gave a contemptuous toss—but with a sense, I thought, of having made too sure that I was so wounded—and left me.
But, when she was gone, I looked about me for a place to hide my face in, and got behind one of the gates in the brewery-lane, and leaned my sleeve against the wall there, and leaned my forehead on it and cried. As I cried, I kicked the wall, and took a hard twist at my hair; so bitter were my feelings, and so sharp was the smart without a name, that needed counteraction.
My sister’s bringing up had made me sensitive. In the little world in which children have their existence whosoever brings them up, there is nothing so finely perceived and so finely felt, as injustice. It may be only small injustice that the child can be exposed to; but the child is small, and its world is small, and its rocking-horse stands as many hands high, according to scale, as a big-boned Irish hunter. Within myself, I had sustained, from my babyhood, a perpetual conflict with injustice. I had known, from the time when I could speak, that my sister, in her capricious and violent coercion, was unjust to me. I had cherished a profound conviction that her bringing me up by hand, gave her no right to bring me up by jerks. Through all my punishments, disgraces, fasts and vigils, and other penitential performances, I had nursed this assurance; and to my communing so much with it, in a solitary and unprotected way, I in great part refer the fact that I was morally timid and very sensitive.
I got rid of my injured feelings for the time, by kicking them into the brewery wall, and twisting them out of my hair, and then I smoothed my face with my sleeve, and came from behind the gate.
The bread and meat were acceptable, and the beer was warming and tingling, and I was soon in spirits to look about me.
To be sure, it was a deserted place, down to the pigeon-house in the brewery-yard, which had been blown crooked on its pole by some high wind, and would have made the pigeons think themselves at sea, if there had been any pigeons there to be rocked by it. But, there were no pigeons in the dove-cot, no horses in the stable, no pigs in the sty, no malt in the store-house, no smells of grains and beer in the copper or the vat. All the uses and scents of the brewery might have evaporated with its last reek of smoke. In a by-yard, there was a wilderness of empty casks, which had a certain sour remembrance of better days lingering about them; but it was too sour to be accepted as a sample of the beer that was gone—and in this respect I remember those recluses as being like most others.
Behind the furthest end of the brewery, was a rank garden with an old wall: not so high but that I could struggle up and hold on long enough to look over it, and see that the rank garden was the garden of the house, and that it was overgrown with tangled weeds, but that there was a track upon the green and yellow paths, as if some one sometimes walked there, and that Ernest was walking away from me even then. But she seemed to be everywhere. For, when I yielded to the temptation presented by the casks, and began to walk on them. I saw her walking on them at the end of the yard of casks. She had her back towards me, and held her pretty brown hair spread out in her two hands, and never looked round, and passed out of my view directly. So, in the brewery itself—by which I mean the large paved lofty place in which they used to make the beer, and where the brewing utensils still were. When I first went into it, and, rather oppressed by its gloom, stood near the door looking about me, I saw her pass among the extinguished fires, and ascend some light iron stairs, and go out by a gallery high overhead, as if she were going out into the sky.
It was in this place, and at this moment, that a strange thing happened to my fancy. I thought it a strange thing then, and I thought it a stranger thing long afterwards. I turned my eyes—a little dimmed by looking up at the frosty light—towards a great wooden beam in a low nook of the building near me on my right hand, and I saw a figure hanging there by the neck. A figure all in yellow white, with but one shoe to the feet; and it hung so, that I could see that the faded trimmings of the dress were like earthy paper, and that the face was Miss Kiley’s, with a movement going over the whole countenance as if she were trying to call to me. In the terror of seeing the figure, and in the terror of being certain that it had not been there a moment before, I at first ran from it, and then ran towards it. And my terror was greatest of all, when I found no figure there.
Nothing less than the frosty light of the cheerful sky, the sight of people passing beyond the bars of the court-yard gate, and the reviving influence of the rest of the bread and meat and beer, would have brought me round. Even with those aids, I might not have come to myself as soon as I did, but that I saw Ernest approaching with the keys, to let me out. She would have some fair reason for looking down upon me, I thought, if she saw me frightened; and she would have no fair reason.
She gave me a triumphant glance in passing me, as if she rejoiced that my hands were so coarse and my boots were so thick, and she opened the gate, and stood holding it. I was passing out without looking at her, when she touched me with a taunting hand.
“Why don’t you cry?”
“Because I don’t want to.”
“You do,” said she. “You have been crying till you are half blind, and you are near crying again now.”
She laughed contemptuously, pushed me out, and locked the gate upon me. I went straight to Mr. Carley’s, and was immensely relieved to find him not at home. So, leaving word with the shopman on what day I was wanted at Miss Kiley’s again, I set off on the four-mile walk to our forge; pondering, as I went along, on all I had seen, and deeply revolving that I was a common labouring-boy; that my hands were coarse; that my boots were thick; that I had fallen into a despicable habit of calling knaves Jacks; that I was much more ignorant than I had considered myself last night, and generally that I was in a low-lived bad way.
Chapter 9
hen I reached home, my sister was very curious to know all about Miss Kiley’s, and asked a number of questions. And I soon found myself getting heavily bumped from behind in the nape of the neck and the small of the back, and having my face ignominiously shoved against the kitchen wall, because I did not answer those questions at sufficient length.
If a dread of not being understood be hidden in the breasts of other young people to anything like the extent to which it used to be hidden in mine—which I consider probable, as I have no particular reason to suspect myself of having been a monstrosity— it is the key to many reservations. I felt convinced that if I described Miss Kiley’s as my eyes had seen it, I should not be understood. Not only that, but I felt convinced that Miss Kiley too would not be understood; and although she was perfectly incomprehensible to me, I entertained an impression that there would be something coarse and treacherous in my dragging her as she really was (to say nothing of Miss Ernest) before the contemplation of Mrs. Stevie. Consequently, I said as little as I could, and had my face shoved against the kitchen wall.
The worst of it was that that bullying old Carley, preyed upon by a devouring curiosity to be informed of all I had seen and heard, came gaping over in his chaise-cart at tea-time, to have the details divulged to him. And the mere sight of the torment, with his fishy eyes and mouth open, his sandy hair inquisitively on end, and his waistcoat heaving with windy arithmetic, made me vicious in my reticence.
“Well, boy,” Uncle Carley began, as soon as he was seated in the chair of honour by the fire. “How did you get on up town?”
I answered, “Pretty well, sir,” and my sister shook her fist at me.
“Pretty well?” Mr. Carley repeated. “Pretty well is no answer. Tell us what you mean by pretty well, boy?”
Whitewash on the forehead hardens the brain into a state of obstinacy perhaps. Anyhow, with whitewash from the wall on my forehead, my obstinacy was adamantine. I reflected for some time, and then answered as if I had discovered a new idea, “I mean pretty well.”
My sister with an exclamation of impatience was going to fly at me—I had no shadow of defence, for Stevie was busy in the forge when Mr. Carley interposed with “No! Don’t lose your temper. Leave this lad to me, ma’am; leave this lad to me.” Mr.
Carley then turned me towards him, as if he were going to cut my hair, and said:
“First (to get our thoughts in order): Forty-three pence?”
I calculated the consequences of replying “Four Hundred Pound,” and finding them against me, went as near the answer as I could—which was somewhere about eightpence off. Mr.
Carley then put me through my pence-table from “twelve pence make one shilling,” up to “forty pence make three and fourpence,” and then triumphantly demanded, as if he had done for me, “Now! How much is forty-three pence?” To which I replied, after a long interval of reflection, “I don’t know.” And I was so aggravated that I almost doubt if I did know.
Mr. Carley worked his head like a screw to screw it out of me, and said, “Is forty-three pence seven and sixpence three fardens, for instance?”
“Yes!” said I. And although my sister instantly boxed my ears, it was highly gratifying to me to see that the answer spoilt his joke, and brought him to a dead stop.
“Boy! What like is Miss Kiley?” Mr. Carley began again when he had recovered; folding his arms tight on his chest and applying the screw.
“Very tall and dark,” I told him.
“Is she, uncle?” asked my sister.
Mr. Carley winked assent; from which I at once inferred that he had never seen Miss Kiley, for she was nothing of the kind.
“Good!” said Mr. Carley conceitedly. (“This is the way to have him! We are beginning to hold our own, I think, Mum?”)
“I am sure, uncle,” returned Mrs. Stevie, “I wish you had him always: you know so well how to deal with him.”
“Now, boy! What was she a-doing of, when you went in today?”
asked Mr. Carley.
“She was sitting,” I answered, “in a black velvet coach.”
Mr. Carley and Mrs. Stevie stared at one another—as they well might—and both repeated, “In a black velvet coach?”
“Yes,” said I. “And Miss Ernest—that’s her niece, I think— handed her in cake and wine at the coach-window, on a gold plate.
And we all had cake and wine on gold plates. And I got up behind the coach to eat mine, because she told me to.”
“Was anybody else there?” asked Mr. Carley.
“Four dogs,” said I.
“Large or small?”
“Immense,” said I. “And they fought for veal cutlets out of a silver basket.”
Mr. Carley and Mrs. Stevie stared at one another again, in utter amazement. I was perfectly frantic—a reckless witness under the torture—and would have told them anything.
“Where was this coach, in the name of gracious?” asked my sister.
“In Miss Kiley’s room.” They stared again. “But there weren’t any horses to it.” I added this saving clause, in the moment of rejecting four richly caparisoned coursers which I had had wild thoughts of harnessing.
“Can this be possible, uncle?” asked Mrs. Stevie. “What can the boy mean?”
“I’ll tell you, Mum,” said Mr. Carley. “My opinion is, it’s a sedan-chair. She’s flighty, you know—very flighty—quite flighty enough to pass her days in a sedan-chair.”
“Did you ever see her in it, uncle?” asked Mrs. Stevie.
“How could I,” he returned, forced to the admission, “when I never see her in my life? Never clapped eyes upon her!”
“Goodness, uncle! And yet you have spoken to her?”
“Why, don’t you know,” said Mr. Carley, testily, “that when I have been there, I have been took up to the outside of her door, and the door has stood ajar, and she has spoke to me that way. Don’t say you don’t know that, Mum. Howsever, the boy went there to play. What did you play at, boy?”
“We played with flags,” I said. (I beg to observe that I think of myself with amazement, when I recall the lies I told on this occasion.)
“Flags!” echoed my sister.
“Yes,” said I. “Ernest waved a blue flag, and I waved a red one, and Miss Kiley waved one sprinkled all over with little gold stars, out at the coach-window. And then we all waved our swords and hurrahed.”
“Swords!” repeated my sister. “Where did you get swords from?”
“Out of a cupboard,” said I. “And I saw pistols in it—and jam— and pills. And there was no daylight in the room, but it was all lighted up with candles.”
“That’s true, Mum,” said Mr. Carley, with a grave nod.
“That’s the state of the case, for that much I’ve seen myself.” And then they both stared at me, and I, with an obtrusive show of artlessness on my countenance, stared at them, and plaited the right leg of my trousers with my right hand.
If they had asked me any more questions I should undoubtedly have betrayed myself, for I was even then on the point of mentioning that there was a balloon in the yard, and should have hazarded the statement but for my invention being divided between that phenomenon and a bear in the brewery. They were so much occupied, however, in discussing the marvels I had already presented for their consideration, that I escaped. The subject still held them when Stevie came in from his work to have a cup of tea. To whom my sister, more for the relief of her own mind than for the gratification of his, related my pretended experiences.
Now, when I saw Stevie open his blue eyes and roll them all round the kitchen in helpless amazement, I was overtaken by penitence;
but only as regarded him—not in the least as regarded the other two. Towards Stevie, and Stevie only, I considered myself a young monster, while they sat debating what results would come to me from Miss Kiley’s acquaintance and favour. They had no doubt that Miss Kiley would “do something” for me; their doubts related to the form that something would take. My sister stood out for “property.” Mr. Carley was in favour of a handsome premium for binding me apprentice to some genteel trade—say, the corn and seed trade, for instance. Stevie fell into the deepest disgrace with both, for offering the bright suggestion that I might only be presented with one of the dogs who had fought for the veal-cutlets. “If a fool’s head can’t express better opinions than that,” said my sister, “and you have got any work to do, you had better go and do it.” So he went.
After Mr. Carley had driven off, and when my sister was washing up, I stole into the forge to Stevie, and remained by him until he had done for the night. Then I said, “Before the fire goes out, Stevie, I should like to tell you something.”
“Should you, Kiara?” said Stevie, drawing his shoeing-stool near the forge. “Then tell us. What is it, Kiara?”
“Stevie,” said I, taking hold of his rolled-up shirt sleeve, and twisting it between my finger and thumb, “you remember all that about Miss Kiley’s?”
“Remember?” said Stevie. “I believe you! Wonderful!”
“It’s a terrible thing, Stevie; it ain’t true.”
“What are you telling of, Kiara?” cried Stevie, falling back in the greatest amazement. “You don’t mean to say it’s—”
“Yes I do; it’s lies, Stevie.”
“But not all of it? Why sure you don’t mean to say, Kiara, that there was no black welwet coach?” For, I stood shaking my head.
“But at least there was dogs, Kiara? Come, Kiara,” said Stevie, persuasively, “if there warn’t no weal-cutlets, at least there was dogs?”
“No, Stevie.”
“A dog?” said Stevie. “A puppy? Come?”
“No, Stevie, there was nothing at all of the kind.”
As I fixed my eyes hopelessly on Stevie, Stevie contemplated me in dismay. “Kiara, old chap! This won’t do, old fellow! I say! Where do you expect to go to?”
“It’s terrible, Stevie; an’t it?”
“Terrible?” cried Stevie. “Awful! What possessed you?”
“I don’t know what possessed me, Stevie,” I replied, letting his shirt sleeve go, and sitting down in the ashes at his feet, hanging my head; “but I wish you hadn’t taught me to call Knaves at cards, Jacks; and I wish my boots weren’t so thick nor my hands so coarse.”
And then I told Stevie that I felt very miserable, and that I hadn’t been able to explain myself to Mrs. Stevie and Carley who were so rude to me, and that there had been a beautiful young lady at Miss Kiley’s who was dreadfully proud, and that she had said I was common, and that I knew I was common, and that I wished I was not common, and that the lies had come of it somehow, though I didn’t know how.
This was a case of metaphysics, at least as difficult for Stevie to deal with, as for me. But Stevie took the case altogether out of the region of metaphysics, and by that means vanquished it.
“There’s one thing you may be sure of, Kiara,” said Stevie, after some rumination, “namely, that lies is lies. Howsever they come, they didn’t ought to come, and they come from the father of lies, and work round to the same. Don’t you tell no more of ’em, Kiara.
That ain’t the way to get out of being common, old chap. And as to being common, I don’t make it out at all clear. You are oncommon in some things. You’re oncommon small. Likewise you’re a oncommon scholar.”
“No, I am ignorant and backward, Stevie.”
“Why, see what a letter you wrote last night! Wrote in print even! I’ve seen letters—Ah! and from gentlefolks!—that I’ll swear weren’t wrote in print,” said Stevie.
“I have learnt next to nothing, Stevie. You think much of me. It’s only that.”
“Well, Kiara,” said Stevie, “be it so or be it son’t, you must be a common scholar afore you can be a oncommon one, I should hope!
The king upon his throne, with his crown upon his ’ed, can’t sit and write his acts of Parliament in print, without having begun, when he were a unpromoted Prince, with the alphabet—Ah!”
added Stevie, with a shake of the head that was full of meaning, “and begun at A too, and worked his way to Z. And I know what that is to do, though I can’t say I’ve exactly done it.”
There was some hope in this piece of wisdom, and it rather encouraged me.
“Whether common ones as to callings and earnings,” pursued Stevie, reflectively, “mightn’t be the better of continuing for a keep company with common ones, instead of going out to play with oncommon ones—which reminds me to hope that there were a flag, perhaps?”
“No, Stevie.”
“(I’m sorry there weren’t a flag, Kiara). Whether that might be, or mightn’t be, is a thing as can’t be looked into now, without putting your sister on the Rampage; and that’s a thing not to be thought of, as being done intentional. Lookee here, Kiara, at what is said to you by a true friend. Which this to you the true friend say. If you can’t get to be oncommon through going straight, you’ll never get to do it through going crooked. So don’t tell no more on ’em, Kiara, and live well and die happy.”
“You are not angry with me, Stevie?”
“No, old chap. But bearing in mind that them were which I meantersay of a stunning and outdacious sort—alluding to them which bordered on weal-cutlets and dog-fighting—a sincere wellwisher would adwise, Kiara, their being dropped into your meditations, when you go up-stairs to bed. That’s all, old chap, and don’t never do it no more.”
When I got up to my little room and said my prayers, I did not forget Stevie’s recommendation, and yet my young mind was in that disturbed and unthankful state, that I thought long after I laid me down, how common Ernest would consider Stevie, a mere blacksmith: how thick his boots, and how coarse his hands. I thought how Stevie and my sister were then sitting in the kitchen, and how I had come up to bed from the kitchen, and how Miss Kiley and Ernest never sat in a kitchen, but were far above the level of such common doings. I fell asleep recalling what I “used to do” when I was at Miss Kiley’s; as though I had been there weeks or months, instead of hours; and as though it were quite an old subject of remembrance, instead of one that had arisen only that day.
That was a memorable day to me, for it made great changes in me. But, it is the same with any life. Imagine one selected day struck out of it, and think how different its course would have been. Pause you who read this, and think for a moment of the long chain of iron or gold, of thorns or flowers, that would never have bound you, but for the formation of the first link on one memorable day.
Chapter 10
he felicitous idea occurred to me a morning or two later when I woke, that the best step I could take towards making myself uncommon was to get out of Robyn everything she knew. In pursuance of this luminous conception I mentioned to Robyn when I went to Mr. Chantelle’s great-aunt’s at night, that I had a particular reason for wishing to get on in life, and that I should feel very much obliged to her if she would impart all her learning to me. Robyn, who was the most obliging of girls, immediately said she would, and indeed began to carry out her promise within five minutes.
The Educational scheme or Course established by Mr. Chantelle’s great-aunt may be resolved into the following synopsis. The pupils ate apples and put straws down one another’s backs, until Mr Chantelle’s great-aunt collected her energies, and made an indiscriminate totter at them with a birch-rod. After receiving the charge with every mark of derision, the pupils formed in line and buzzingly passed a ragged book from hand to hand. The book had an alphabet in it, some figures and tables, and a little spelling— that is to say, it had had once. As soon as this volume began to circulate, Mr. Chantelle’s great-aunt fell into a state of coma; arising either from sleep or a rheumatic paroxysm. The pupils then entered among themselves upon a competitive examination on the subject of Boots, with the view of ascertaining who could tread the hardest upon whose toes. This mental exercise lasted until Robyn made a rush at them and distributed three defaced Bibles (shaped as if they had been unskilfully cut off the chump-end of something), more illegibly printed at the best than any curiosities of literature I have since met with, speckled all over with ironmould, and having various specimens of the insect world smashed between their leaves. This part of the Course was usually lightened by several single combats between Robyn and refractory students. When the fights were over, Robyn gave out the number of a page, and then we all read aloud what we could—or what we couldn’t—in a frightful chorus; Robyn leading with a high shrill monotonous voice, and none of us having the least notion of, or reverence for, what we were reading about. When this horrible din had lasted a certain time, it mechanically awoke Mr. Chantelle’s great-aunt, who staggered at a boy fortuitously, and pulled his ears. This was understood to terminate the Course for the evening, and we emerged into the air with shrieks of intellectual victory. It is fair to remark that there was no prohibition against any pupil’s entertaining himself with a slate or even with the ink (when there was any), but that it was not easy to pursue that branch of study in the winter season, on account of the little general shop in which the classes were holden—and which was also Mr. Chantelle’s great￾aunt’s sitting-room and bed-chamber—being but faintly illuminated through the agency of one low-spirited dip-candle and no snuffers.
It appeared to me that it would take time, to become uncommon under these circumstances: nevertheless, I resolved to try it, and that very evening Robyn entered on our special agreement, by imparting some information from her little catalogue of Prices, under the head of moist sugar, and lending me, to copy at home, a large old English D which she had imitated from the heading of some newspaper, and which I supposed, until she told me what it was, to be a design for a buckle.
Of course there was a public-house in the village, and of course Stevie liked sometimes to smoke his pipe there. I had received strict orders from my sister to call for him at the Three Jolly Bargemen, that evening, on my way from school, and bring him home at my peril. To the Three Jolly Bargemen, therefore, I directed my steps.
There was a bar at the Jolly Bargemen, with some alarmingly long chalk scores in it on the wall at the side of the door, which seemed to me to be never paid off. They had been there ever since I could remember, and had grown more than I had. But there was a quantity of chalk about our country, and perhaps the people neglected no opportunity of turning it to account.
It being Saturday night, I found the landlord looking rather grimly at these records, but as my business was with Stevie and not with him, I merely wished him good evening, and passed into the common room at the end of the passage, where there was a bright large kitchen fire, and where Stevie was smoking his pipe in company with Mr. Chantelle and a stranger. Stevie greeted me as usual with “Halloa, Kiara, old chap!” and the moment he said that, the stranger turned his head and looked at me.
He was a secret-looking man whom I had never seen before.
His head was all on one side, and one of his eyes was half shut up, as if he were taking aim at something with an invisible gun. He had a pipe in his mouth, and he took it out, and, after slowly blowing all his smoke away and looking hard at me all the time, nodded. So, I nodded, and then he nodded again, and made room on the settle beside him that I might sit down there.
But, as I was used to sit beside Stevie whenever I entered that place of resort, I said “No, thank you, sir,” and fell into the space Stevie made for me on the opposite settle. The strange man, after glancing at Stevie, and seeing that his attention was otherwise engaged, nodded to me again when I had taken my seat, and then rubbed his leg—in a very odd way, as it struck me.
“You was saying,” said the strange man, turning to Stevie, “that you was a blacksmith.”
“Yes. I said it, you know,” said Stevie.
“What’ll you drink, Mr.—? You didn’t mention your name, by￾the-bye.”
Stevie mentioned it now, and the strange man called him by it.
“What’ll you drink, Mr. Bria? At my expense? To top up with?”
“Well,” said Stevie, “to tell you the truth, I ain’t much in the habit of drinking at anybody’s expense but my own.”
“Habit? No,” returned the stranger, “but once and away, and on a Saturday night too. Come! Put a name to it, Mr. Bria.”
“I wouldn’t wish to be stiff company,” said Stevie. “Rum.”
“Rum,” repeated the stranger. “And will the other gentleman originate a sentiment.”
“Rum,” said Mr. Chantelle.
“Three Rums!” cried the stranger, calling to the landlord.
“Glasses round!”
“This other gentleman,” observed Stevie, by way of introducing Mr. Chantelle, “is a gentleman that you would like to hear give it out.
Our clerk at church.”
“Aha!” said the stranger, quickly, and cocking his eye at me.
“The lonely church, right out on the marshes, with graves round it!”
“That’s it,” said Stevie.
The stranger, with a comfortable kind of grunt over his pipe, put his legs up on the settle that he had to himself. He wore a flapping broad-brimmed traveller’s hat, and under it a handkerchief tied over his head in the manner of a cap: so that he showed no hair. As he looked at the fire, I thought I saw a cunning expression, followed by a half-laugh, come into his face.
“I am not acquainted with this country, gentlemen, but it seems a solitary country towards the river.”
“Most marshes is solitary,” said Stevie.
“No doubt, no doubt. Do you find any gipsies, now, or tramps, or vagrants of any sort, out there?”
“No,” said Stevie; “none but a runaway convict now and then. And we don’t find them, easy. Eh, Mr. Chantelle?”
Mr. Chantelle, with a majestic remembrance of old discomfiture, assented; but not warmly.
“Seems you have been out after such?” asked the stranger.
“Once,” returned Stevie. “Not that we wanted to take them, you understand; we went out as lookers on; me, and Mr. Chantelle, and Kiara. Didn’t us, Kiara?”
“Yes, Stevie.”
The stranger looked at me again—still cocking his eye, as if he were expressly taking aim at me with his invisible gun—and said, “He’s a likely young parcel of bones that. What is it you call him?”
“Kiara,” said Stevie.
“Christened Kiara?”
“No, not christened Kiara.”
“Surname Kiara?”
“No,” said Stevie, “it’s a kind of family name what he gave himself when a infant, and is called by.”
“Son of yours?”
“Well,” said Stevie, meditatively—not, of course, that it could be in anywise necessary to consider about it, but because it was the way at the Jolly Bargemen to seem to consider deeply about everything that was discussed over pipes; “well—no. No, he ain’t.”
“Nevvy?” said the strange man.
“Well,” said Stevie, with the same appearance of profound cogitation, “he is not—no, not to deceive you, he is not—my nevvy.”
“What the Blue Blazes is he?” asked the stranger. Which appeared to me to be an inquiry of unnecessary strength.
Mr. Chantelle struck in upon that; as one who knew all about relationships, having professional occasion to bear in mind what female relations a man might not marry; and expounded the ties between me and Stevie. Having his hand in, Mr. Chantelle finished off with a most terrifically snarling passage from Richard the Third, and seemed to think he had done quite enough to account for it when he added,—“as the poet says.”
And here I may remark that when Mr. Chantelle referred to me, he considered it a necessary part of such reference to rumple my hair and poke it into my eyes. I cannot conceive why everybody of his standing who visited at our house should always have put me through the same inflammatory process under similar circumstances. Yet I do not call to mind that I was ever in my earlier youth the subject of remark in our social family circle, but some large-handed person took some such ophthalmic steps to patronize me.
All this while, the strange man looked at nobody but me, and looked at me as if he were determined to have a shot at me at last, and bring me down. But he said nothing after offering his Blue Blazes observation, until the glasses of rum-and-water were brought; and then he made his shot, and a most extraordinary shot it was.
It was not a verbal remark, but a proceeding in dump show, and was pointedly addressed to me. He stirred his rum-and-water pointedly at me, and he tasted his rum-and-water pointedly at me.
And he stirred it and he tasted it: not with a spoon that was brought to him, but with a file.
He did this so that nobody but I saw the file; and when he had done it he wiped the file and put it in a breast-pocket. I knew it to be Stevie’s file, and I knew that he knew my convict, the moment I saw the instrument. I sat gazing at him, spell-bound. But he now reclined on his settle, taking very little notice of me, and talking principally about turnips.
There was a delicious sense of cleaning-up and making a quiet pause before going on in life afresh, in our village on Saturday nights, which stimulated Stevie to dare to stay out half an hour longer on Saturdays than at other times. The half hour and the rum-and-water running out together, Stevie got up to go, and took me by the hand.
“Stop half a moment, Mr. Bria,” said the strange man. “I think I’ve got a bright new shilling somewhere in my pocket, and if I have, the boy shall have it.”
He looked it out from a handful of small change, folded it in some crumpled paper, and gave it to me. “Yours!” said he. “Mind!
Your own.”
I thanked him, staring at him far beyond the bounds of good manners, and holding tight to Stevie. He gave Stevie good-night, and he gave Mr. Chantelle good-night (who went out with us), and he gave me only a look with his aiming eye—no, not a look, for he shut it up, but wonders may be done with an eye by hiding it.
On the way home, if I had been in a humour for talking, the talk must have been all on my side, for Mr. Chantelle parted from us at the door of the Jolly Bargemen, and Stevie went all the way home with his mouth wide open, to rinse the rum out with as much air as possible. But I was in a manner stupefied by this turning up of my old misdeed and old acquaintance, and could think of nothing else.
My sister was not in a very bad temper when we presented ourselves in the kitchen, and Stevie was encouraged by that unusual circumstance to tell her about the bright shilling. “A bad un, I’ll be bound,” said Mrs. Stevie triumphantly, “or he wouldn’t have given it to the boy! Let’s look at it.”
I took it out of the paper, and it proved to be a good one. “But what’s this?” said Mrs. Stevie, throwing down the shilling and catching up the paper. “Two One-Pound notes?”
Nothing less than two fat sweltering one-pound notes that seemed to have been on terms of the warmest intimacy with all the cattle markets in the county. Stevie caught up his hat again, and ran with them to the Jolly Bargemen to restore them to their owner.
While he was gone, I sat down on my usual stool and looked vacantly at my sister, feeling pretty sure that the man would not be there.
Presently, Stevie came back, saying that the man was gone, but that he, Stevie, had left word at the Three Jolly Bargemen concerning the notes. Then my sister sealed them up in a piece of paper, and put them under some dried rose-leaves in an ornamental tea-pot on the top of a press in the state parlour. There they remained, a nightmare to me, many and many a night and day.
I had sadly broken sleep when I got to bed, through thinking of the strange man taking aim at me with his invisible gun, and of the guiltily coarse and common thing it was, to be on secret terms of conspiracy with convicts—a feature in my low career that I had previously forgotten. I was haunted by the file too. A dread possessed me that when I least expected it, the file would reappear. I coaxed myself to sleep by thinking of Miss Kiley’s, next Wednesday; and in my sleep I saw the file coming at me out of a door, without seeing who held it, and I screamed myself awake.
Chapter 11
t the appointed time I returned to Miss Kiley’s, and my hesitating ring at the gate brought out Ernest. She locked it after admitting me, as she had done before, and again preceded me into the dark passage where her candle stood.
She took no notice of me until she had the candle in her hand, when she looked over her shoulder, superciliously saying, “You are to come this way today,” and took me to quite another part of the house.
The passage was a long one, and seemed to pervade the whole square basement of the Manor House. We traversed but one side of the square, however, and at the end of it she stopped, and put her candle down and opened a door. Here, the daylight reappeared, and I found myself in a small paved court-yard, the opposite side of which was formed by a detached dwelling-house, that looked as if it had once belonged to the manager or head clerk of the extinct brewery. There was a clock in the outer wall of this house. Like the clock in Miss Kiley’s room, and like Miss Kiley’s watch, it had stopped at twenty minutes to nine.
We went in at the door, which stood open, and into a gloomy room with a low ceiling, on the ground floor at the back. There was some company in the room, and Ernest said to me as she joined it, “You are to go and stand there, boy, till you are wanted.”
“There”, being the window, I crossed to it, and stood “there,” in a very uncomfortable state of mind, looking out.
It opened to the ground, and looked into a most miserable corner of the neglected garden, upon a rank ruin of cabbage￾stalks, and one box tree that had been clipped round long ago, like a pudding, and had a new growth at the top of it, out of shape and of a different colour, as if that part of the pudding had stuck to the saucepan and got burnt. This was my homely thought, as I contemplated the box-tree. There had been some light snow, overnight, and it lay nowhere else to my knowledge; but, it had not quite melted from the cold shadow of this bit of garden, and the wind caught it up in little eddies and threw it at the window, as if it pelted me for coming there.
I divined that my coming had stopped conversation in the room, and that its other occupants were looking at me. I could see nothing of the room except the shining of the fire in the window glass, but I stiffened in all my joints with the consciousness that I was under close inspection.
There were three ladies in the room and one gentleman. Before I had been standing at the window five minutes, they somehow conveyed to me that they were all toadies and humbugs, but that each of them pretended not to know that the others were toadies and humbugs: because the admission that he or she did know it, would have made him or her out to be a toady and humbug.
They all had a listless and dreary air of waiting somebody’s pleasure, and the most talkative of the ladies had to speak quite rigidly to repress a yawn. This lady, whose name was Camilla, very much reminded me of my sister, with the difference that she was older, and (as I found when I caught sight of her) of a blunter cast of features. Indeed, when I knew her better I began to think it was a Mercy she had any features at all, so very blank and high was the dead wall of her face.
“Poor dear soul!” said this lady, with an abruptness of manner quite my sister’s. “Nobody’s enemy but his own!”
“It would be much more commendable to be somebody else’s enemy,” said the gentleman; “far more natural.”
“Cousin Raymond,” observed another lady, “we are to love our neighbour.”
“Sarah Bellatrix,” returned Cousin Raymond, “if a man is not his own neighbour, who is?”
Miss Bellatrix laughed, and Camilla laughed and said (checking a yawn), “The idea!” But I thought they seemed to think it rather a good idea too. The other lady, who had not spoken yet, said gravely and emphatically, “Very true!”
“Poor soul!” Camilla presently went on (I knew they had all been looking at me in the mean time), “he is so very strange!
Would anyone believe that when Tom’s wife died, he actually could not be induced to see the importance of the children’s having the deepest of trimmings to their mourning? ‘Good Lord!’
says he, ‘Camilla, what can it signify so long as the poor bereaved little things are in black?’ So like Matthew! The idea!”
“Good points in him, good points in him,” said Cousin Raymond; “Heaven forbid I should deny good points in him; but he never had, and he never will have, any sense of the proprieties.”
“You know I was obliged,” said Camilla, “I was obliged to be firm. I said, ‘It WILL NOT DO, for the credit of the family.’ I told him that, without deep trimmings, the family was disgraced. I cried about it from breakfast till dinner. I injured my digestion.
And at last he flung out in his violent way, and said, with a D, ‘Then do as you like.’ Thank Goodness it will always be a consolation to me to know that I instantly went out in a pouring rain and bought the things.”
“He paid for them, did he not?” asked Ernest.
“It’s not the question, my dear child, who paid for them,”
returned Camilla. “I bought them. And I shall often think of that with peace, when I wake up in the night.”
The ringing of a distant bell, combined with the echoing of some cry or call along the passage by which I had come, interrupted the conversation and caused Ernest to say to me, “Now, boy!” On my turning round, they all looked at me with the utmost contempt, and, as I went out, I heard Sarah Bellatrix say, “Well I am sure! What next!” and Camilla add, with indignation, “Was there ever such a fancy! The i-de-a!”
As we were going with our candle along the dark passage, Ernest stopped all of a sudden, and, facing round, said in her taunting manner with her face quite close to mine:
“Well?”
“Well, miss?” I answered, almost falling over her and checking myself.
She stood looking at me, and, of course, I stood looking at her.
“Am I pretty?”
“Yes; I think you are very pretty.”
“Am I insulting?”
“Not so much so as you were last time,” said I.
“Not so much so?”
“No.”
She fired when she asked the last question, and she slapped my face with such force as she had, when I answered it.
“Now?” said she. “You little coarse monster, what do you think of me now?”
“I shall not tell you.”
“Because you are going to tell, up-stairs. Is that it?”
“No,” said I, “that’s not it.”
“Why don’t you cry again, you little wretch?”
“Because I’ll never cry for you again,” said I. Which was, I suppose, as false a declaration as ever was made; for I was inwardly crying for her then, and I know what I know of the pain she cost me afterwards.
We went on our way up-stairs after this episode; and, as we were going up, we met a gentleman groping his way down.
“Whom have we here?” asked the gentleman, stopping and looking at me.
“A boy,” said Ernest.
He was a burly man of an exceedingly dark complexion, with an exceedingly large head and a corresponding large hand. He took my chin in his large hand and turned up my face to have a look at me by the light of the candle. He was prematurely bald on the top of his head, and had bushy black eyebrows that wouldn’t lie down but stood up bristling. His eyes were set very deep in his head, and were disagreeably sharp and suspicious. He had a large watch￾chain, and strong black dots where his beard and whiskers would have been if he had let them. He was nothing to me, and I could have had no foresight then, that he ever would be anything to me, but it happened that I had this opportunity of observing him well.
“Boy of the neighbourhood? Hey?” said he.
“Yes, sir,” said I.
“How do you come here?”
“Miss Kiley sent for me, sir,” I explained.
“Well! Behave yourself. I have a pretty large experience of boys, and you’re a bad set of fellows. Now mind!” said he, biting the side of his great forefinger as he frowned at me, “you behave yourself!”
With those words, he released me—which I was glad of, for his hand smelt of scented soap—and went his way down-stairs. I wondered whether he could be a doctor; but no, I thought; he couldn’t be a doctor, or he would have a quieter and more persuasive manner. There was not much time to consider the subject, for we were soon in Miss Kiley’s room, where she and everything else were just as I had left them. Ernest left me standing near the door, and I stood there until Miss Kiley cast her eyes upon me from the dressing-table.
“So!” she said, without being startled or surprised; “the days have worn away, have they?”
“Yes, ma’am. To-day is—”
“There, there, there!” with the impatient movement of her fingers. “I don’t want to know. Are you ready to play?”
I was obliged to answer in some confusion, “I don’t think I am, ma’am.”
“Not at cards again?” she demanded, with a searching look.
“Yes, ma’am; I could do that, if I was wanted.”
“Since this house strikes you old and grave, boy,” said Miss Kiley, impatiently, “and you are unwilling to play, are you willing to work?”
I could answer this inquiry with a better heart than I had been able to find for the other question, and I said I was quite willing.
“Then go into that opposite room,” said she, pointing at the door behind me with her withered hand, “and wait there till I come.”
I crossed the staircase landing, and entered the room she indicated. From that room, too, the daylight was completely excluded, and it had an airless smell that was oppressive. A fire had been lately kindled in the damp old-fashioned grate, and it was more disposed to go out than to burn up, and the reluctant smoke which hung in the room seemed colder than the clearer air—like our own marsh mist. Certain wintry branches of candles on the high chimneypiece faintly lighted the chamber: or, it would be more expressive to say, faintly troubled its darkness. It was spacious, and I dare say had once been handsome, but every discernible thing in it was covered with dust and mould, and dropping to pieces. The most prominent object was a long table with a tablecloth spread on it, as if a feast had been in preparation when the house and the clocks all stopped together. An epergne or centrepiece of some kind was in the middle of this cloth; it was so heavily overhung with cobwebs that its form was quite undistinguishable; and, as I looked along the yellow expanse out of which I remember its seeming to grow, like a black fungus, I saw speckled-legged spiders with blotchy bodies running home to it, and running out from it, as if some circumstances of the greatest public importance had just transpired in the spider community.
I heard the mice too, rattling behind the panels, as if the same occurrence were important to their interests. But, the blackbeetles took no notice of the agitation, and groped about the hearth in a ponderous elderly way, as if they were short-sighted and hard of hearing, and not on terms with one another.
These crawling things had fascinated my attention and I was watching them from a distance, when Miss Kiley laid a hand upon my shoulder. In her other hand she had a crutch-headed stick on which she leaned, and she looked like the Witch of the place.
“This,” said she, pointing to the long table with her stick, “is where I will be laid when I am dead. They shall come and look at me here.”
With some vague misgiving that she might get upon the table then and there and die at once, the complete realization of the ghastly waxwork at the Fair, I shrank under her touch.
“What do you think that is?” she asked me, again pointing with her stick; “that, where those cobwebs are?”
“I can’t guess what it is, ma’am.”
“It’s a great cake. A bride-cake. Mine!”
She looked all round the room in a glaring manner, and then said, leaning on me while her hand twitched my shoulder, “Come, come, come! Walk me, walk me!”
I made out from this, that the work I had to do, was to walk Miss Kiley round and round the room. Accordingly, I started at once, and she leaned upon my shoulder, and we went away at a pace that might have been an imitation (founded on my first impulse under that roof) of Mr. Carley’s chaise-cart.
She was not physically strong, and after a little time said, “Slower!” Still, we went at an impatient fitful speed, and as we went, she twitched the hand upon my shoulder, and worked her mouth, and led me to believe that we were going fast because her thoughts went fast. After a while she said, “Call Ernest!” so I went out on the landing and roared that name as I had done on the previous occasion. When her light appeared, I returned to Miss Kiley, and we started away again round and round the room.
If only Ernest had come to be a spectator of our proceedings, I should have felt sufficiently discontented; but, as she brought with her the three ladies and the gentleman whom I had seen below, I didn’t know what to do. In my politeness, I would have stopped;
but, Miss Kiley twitched my shoulder, and we posted on— with a shame-faced consciousness on my part that they would think it was all my doing.
“Dear Miss Kiley,” said Miss Sarah Bellatrix. “How well you look!”
“I do not,” returned Miss Kiley. “I am yellow skin and bone.”
Camilla brightened when Miss Bellatrix met with this rebuff; and she murmured, as she plaintively contemplated Miss Kiley, “Poor dear soul! Certainly not to be expected to look well, poor thing. The idea!”
“And how are you?” said Miss Kiley to Camilla. As we were close to Camilla then, I would have stopped as a matter of course, only Miss Kiley wouldn’t stop. We swept on, and I felt that I was highly obnoxious to Camilla.
“Thank you, Miss Kiley,” she returned, “I am as well as can be expected.”
“Why, what’s the matter with you?” asked Miss Kiley, with exceeding sharpness.
“Nothing worth mentioning,” replied Camilla. “I don’t wish to make a display of my feelings, but I have habitually thought of you more in the night than I am quite equal to.”
“Then don’t think of me,” retorted Miss Kiley.
“Very easily said!” remarked Camilla, amiably repressing a sob, while a hitch came into her upper lip, and her tears overflowed.
“Raymond is a witness what ginger and sal volatile I am obliged to take in the night. Raymond is a witness what nervous jerkings I have in my legs. Chokings and nervous jerkings, however, are nothing new to me when I think with anxiety of those I love. If I could be less affectionate and sensitive, I should have a better digestion and an iron set of nerves. I am sure I wish it could be so.
But as to not thinking of you in the night—The idea!” Here, a burst of tears.
The Raymond referred to, I understood to be the gentleman present, and him I understood to be Mr. Camilla. He came to the rescue at this point, and said in a consolatory and complimentary voice, “Camilla, my dear, it is well known that your family feelings are gradually undermining you to the extent of making one of your legs shorter than the other.”
“I am not aware,” observed the grave lady whose voice I had heard but once, “that to think of any person is to make a great claim upon that person, my dear.”
Miss Sarah Bellatrix, whom I now saw to be a little dry brown corrugated old woman, with a small face that might have been made of walnut shells, and a large mouth like a cat’s without the whiskers, supported this position by saying, “No, indeed, my dear.
Hem!”
“Thinking is easy enough,” said the grave lady.
“What is easier, you know?” assented Miss Sarah Bellatrix.
“Oh, yes, yes!” cried Camilla, whose fermenting feelings appeared to rise from her legs to her bosom. “It’s all very true! It’s a weakness to be so affectionate, but I can’t help it. No doubt my health would be much better if it was otherwise, still I wouldn’t change my disposition if I could. It’s the cause of much suffering, but it’s a consolation to know I posses it, when I wake up in the night.” Here another burst of feeling.
Miss Kiley and I had never stopped all this time, but kept going round and round the room: now, brushing against the skirts of the visitors: now, giving them the whole length of the dismal chamber.
“There’s Matthew!” said Camilla. “Never mixing with any natural ties, never coming here to see how Miss Kiley is! I have taken to the sofa with my staylace cut, and have lain there hours, insensible, with my head over the side, and my hair all down, and my feet I don’t know where—”
(“Much higher than your head, my love,” said Mr. Camilla.)
“I have gone off into that state, hours and hours, on account of Matthew’s strange and inexplicable conduct, and nobody has thanked me.”
“Really I must say I should think not!” interposed the grave lady.
“You see, my dear,” added Miss Sarah Bellatrix (a blandly vicious personage), “the question to put to yourself is, who did you expect to thank you, my love?”
“Without expecting any thanks, or anything of the sort,”
resumed Camilla, “I have remained in that state, hours and hours, and Raymond is a witness of the extent to which I have choked, and what the total inefficacy of ginger has been, and I have been heard at the pianoforte-tuner’s across the street, where the poor mistaken children have even supposed it to be pigeons cooing at a distance—and now to be told—” Here Camilla put her hand to her throat, and began to be quite chemical as to the formation of new combinations there.
When this same Matthew was mentioned, Miss Kiley stopped me and herself, and stood looking at the speaker. This change had a great influence in bringing Camilla’s chemistry to a sudden end.
“Matthew will come and see me at last,” said Miss Kiley, sternly, when I am laid on that table. That will be his place— there,” striking the table with her stick, “at my head! And yours will be there! And your husband’s there! And Sarah Bellatrix’s there! And Georgiana’s there! Now you all know where to take your stations when you come to feast upon me. And now go!”
At the mention of each name, she had struck the table with her stick in a new place. She now said, “Walk me, walk me!” and we went on again.
“I suppose there’s nothing to be done,” exclaimed Camilla, “but comply and depart. It’s something to have seen the object of one’s love and duty, for even so short a time. I shall think of it with a melancholy satisfaction when I wake up in the night. I wish Matthew could have that comfort, but he sets it at defiance. I am determined not to make a display of my feelings, but it’s very hard to be told one wants to feast on one’s relations—as if one was a Giant—and to be told to go. The bare idea!”
Mr. Camilla interposing, as Mrs. Camilla laid her hand upon her heaving bosom, that lady assumed an unnatural fortitude of manner which I supposed to be expressive of an intention to drop and choke when out of view, and kissing her hand to Miss Kiley, was escorted forth. Sarah Bellatrix and Georgiana contended who should remain last; but, Sarah was too knowing to be outdone, and ambled round Georgiana with that artful slipperiness, that the latter was obliged to take precedence. Sarah Bellatrix then made her separate effect of departing with “Bless you, Miss Kiley dear!” and with a smile of forgiving pity on her walnut-shell countenance for the weaknesses of the rest.
While Ernest was away lighting them down, Miss Kiley still walked with her hand on my shoulder, but more and more slowly. At last she stopped before the fire, and said, after muttering and looking at it some seconds:
“This is my birthday, Kiara.”
I was going to wish her many happy returns, when she lifted her stick.
“I don’t suffer it to be spoken of. I don’t suffer those who were here just now, or any one, to speak of it. They come here on the day, but they dare not refer to it.”
Of course I made no further effort to refer to it.
“On this day of the year, long before you were born, this heap of decay,” stabbing with her crutched stick at the pile of cobwebs on the table but not touching it, “was brought here. It and I have worn away together. The mice have gnawed at it, and sharper teeth than teeth of mice have gnawed at me.”
She held the head of her stick against her heart as she stood looking at the table; she in her once white dress, all yellow and withered; the once white cloth all yellow and withered; everything around, in a state to crumble under a touch.
“When the ruin is complete,” said she, with a ghastly look, “and when they lay me dead, in my bride’s dress on the bride’s table— which shall be done, and which will be the finished curse upon him—so much the better if it is done on this day!”
She stood looking at the table as if she stood looking at her own figure lying there. I remained quiet. Ernest returned, and she too remained quiet. It seemed to me that we continued thus for a long time. In the heavy air of the room, and the heavy darkness that brooded in its remoter corners, I even had an alarming fancy that Ernest and I might presently begin to decay.
At length, not coming out of her distraught state by degrees, but in an instant, Miss Kiley said, “Let me see you two play cards;
why have you not begun?” With that, we returned to her room, and sat down as before; I was beggared, as before; and again, as before, Miss Kiley watched us all the time, directed my attention to Ernest’s beauty, and made me notice it the more by trying her jewels on Ernest’s breast and hair.
Ernest, for her part, likewise treated me as before; except that she did not condescend to speak. When we had played some half￾dozen games, a day was appointed for my return, and I was taken down into the yard to be fed in the former dog-like manner. There, too, I was again left to wander about as I liked.
It is not much to the purpose whether a gate in that garden wall which I had scrambled up to peep over on the last occasion was, on that last occasion, open or shut. Enough that I saw no gate them, and that I saw one now. As it stood open, and as I knew that Ernest had let the visitors out—for, she had returned with the keys in her hand—I strolled into the garden and strolled all over it.
It was quite a wilderness, and there were old melon-frames and cucumber-frames in it, which seemed in their decline to have produced a spontaneous growth of weak attempts at pieces of old hats and boots, with now and then a weedy offshoot into the likeness of a battered saucepan.
When I had exhausted the garden, and a greenhouse with nothing in it but a fallen-down grape-vine and some bottles, I found myself in the dismal corner upon which I had looked out of the window. Never questioning for a moment that the house was now empty, I looked in at another window, and found myself, to my great surprise, exchanging a broad stare with a pale young gentleman with red eyelids and light hair.
This pale young gentleman quickly disappeared, and re￾appeared beside me. He had been at his books when I had found myself staring at him, and I now saw that he was inky.
“Halloa!” said he, “young fellow!”
Halloa being a general observation which I had usually observed to be best answered by itself, I said, “Halloa!” politely omitting young fellow.
“Who let you in?” said he.
“Miss Ernest.”
“Who gave you leave to prowl about?”
“Miss Ernest.”
“Come and fight,” said the pale young gentleman.
What could I do but follow him? I have often asked myself the question since: but, what else could I do? His manner was so final and I was so astonished, that I followed where he led, as if I had been under a spell.
“Stop a minute, though,” he said, wheeling round before we had gone many paces. “I ought to give you a reason for fighting, too. There it is!” In a most irritating manner he instantly slapped his hands against one another, daintily flung one of his legs up behind him, pulled my hair, slapped his hands again, dipped his head, and butted it into my stomach.
The bull-like proceeding last mentioned, besides that it was unquestionably to be regarded in the light of a liberty, was particularly disagreeable just after bread and meat. I therefore hit out at him and was going to hit out again, when he said, “Aha!
Would you?” and began dancing backwards and forwards in a manner quite unparalleled within my limited experience.
“Laws of the game!” said he. Here, he skipped from his left leg on to his right. “Regular rules!” Here, he skipped from his right leg on to his left. “Come to the ground, and go through the preliminaries!” Here, he dodged backwards and forwards, and did all sorts of things while I looked helplessly at him.
I was secretly afraid of him when I saw him so dexterous; but, I felt morally and physically convinced that his light head of hair could have had no business in the pit of my stomach, and that I had a right to consider it irrelevant when so obtruded on my attention. Therefore, I followed him without a word, to a retired nook of the garden, formed by the junction of two walls and screened by some rubbish. On his asking me if I was satisfied with the ground, and on my replying Yes, he begged my leave to absent himself for a moment, and quickly returned with a bottle of water and a sponge dipped in vinegar. “Available for both,” he said, placing these against the wall. And then fell to pulling off, not only his jacket and waistcoat, but his shirt too, in a manner at once light-hearted, businesslike, and bloodthirsty.
Although he did not look very healthy—having pimples on his face, and a breaking out at his mouth—these dreadful preparations quite appalled me. I judged him to be about my own age, but he was much taller, and he had a way of spinning himself about that was full of appearance. For the rest, he was a young gentleman in a grey suit (when not denuded for battle), with his elbows, knees, wrists, and heels, considerably in advance of the rest of him as to development.
My heart failed me when I saw him squaring at me with every demonstration of mechanical nicety, and eyeing my anatomy as if he were minutely choosing his bone. I never have been so surprised in my life, as I was when I let out the first blow, and saw him lying on his back, looking up at me with a bloody nose and his face exceedingly fore-shortened.
But, he was on his feet directly, and after sponging himself with a great show of dexterity began squaring again. The second greatest surprise I have ever had in my life was seeing him on his back again, looking up at me out of a black eye.
His spirit inspired me with great respect. He seemed to have no strength, and he never once hit me hard, and he was always knocked down; but, he would be up again in a moment, sponging himself or drinking out of the water-bottle, with the greatest satisfaction in seconding himself according to form, and then came at me with an air and a show that made me believe he really was going to do for me at last. He got heavily bruised, for I am sorry to record that the more I hit him, the harder I hit him; but, he came up again and again and again, until at last he got a bad fall with the back of his head against the wall. Even after that crisis in our affairs, he got up and turned round and round confusedly a few times, not knowing where I was; but finally went on his knees to his sponge and threw it up: at the same time panting out, “That means you have won.”
He seemed so brave and innocent, that although I had not proposed the contest I felt but a gloomy satisfaction in my victory.
Indeed, I go so far as to hope that I regarded myself while dressing, as a species of savage young wolf, or other wild beast.
However, I got dressed, darkly wiping my sanguinary face at intervals, and I said, “Can I help you?” and he said “No thankee,”
and I said “Good afternoon,” and he said “Same to you.”
When I got into the court-yard, I found Ernest waiting with the keys. But, she neither asked me where I had been, nor why I had kept her waiting; and there was a bright flush upon her face, as though something had happened to delight her. Instead of going straight to the gate, too, she stepped back into the passage, and beckoned me.
“Come here! You may kiss me, if you like.”
I kissed her cheek as she turned it to me. I think I would have gone through a great deal to kiss her cheek. But, I felt that the kiss was given to the coarse common boy as a piece of money might have been, and that it was worth nothing.
What with the birthday visitors, and what with the cards, and what with the fight, my stay had lasted so long, that when I neared home the light on the spit of sand off the point on the marshes was gleaming against a black night-sky, and Stevie’s furnace was flinging a path of fire across the road.
Chapter 12
y mind grew very uneasy on the subject of the pale young gentleman. The more I thought of the fight, and recalled the pale young gentleman on his back in various stages of puffy and incrimsoned countenance, the more certain it appeared that something would be done to me. I felt that the pale young gentleman’s blood was on my head, and that the Law would avenge it. Without having any definite idea of the penalties I had incurred, it was clear to me that village boys could not go stalking about the country, ravaging the houses of gentlefolks and pitching into the studious youth of England, without laying themselves open to severe punishment. For some days, I even kept close at home, and looked out at the kitchen door with the greatest caution and trepidation before going on an errand, lest the officers of the County Jail should pounce upon me.
The pale young gentleman’s nose had stained my trousers, and I tried to wash out that evidence of my guilt in the dead of night. I had cut my knuckles against the pale young gentleman’s teeth, and I twisted my imagination into a thousand tangles, as I devised incredible ways of accounting for that damnatory circumstance when I should be haled before the Judges.
When the day came round for my return to the scene of the deed of violence, my terrors reached their height. Whether myrmidons of Justice, specially sent down from Nigeria, would be lying in ambush behind the gate? Whether Miss Kiley, preferring to take personal vengeance for an outrage done to her house, might rise in those grave-clothes of hers, draw a pistol, and shoot me dead? Whether suborned boys—a numerous band of mercenaries—might be engaged to fall upon me in the brewery, and cuff me until I was no more? It was high testimony to my confidence in the spirit of the pale young gentleman, that I never imagined him accessory to these retaliations; they always came into my mind as the acts of injudicious relatives of his, goaded on by the state of his visage and an indignant sympathy with the family features.
However, go to Miss Kiley’s I must, and go I did. And behold! nothing came of the late struggle. It was not alluded to in any way, and no pale young gentleman was to be discovered on the premises. I found the same gate open, and I explored the garden, and even looked in at the windows of the detached house;
but, my view was suddenly stopped by the closed shutters within, and all was lifeless. Only in the corner where the combat had taken place, could I detect any evidence of the young gentleman’s existence. There were traces of his gore in that spot, and I covered them with garden-mould from the eye of man.
On the broad landing between Miss Kiley’s own room and that other room in which the long table was laid out, I saw a garden-chair—a light chair on wheels, that you pushed from behind. It had been placed there since my last visit, and I entered, that same day, on a regular occupation of pushing Miss Kiley in this chair (when she was tired of walking with her hand upon my shoulder) round her own room, and across the landing, and round the other room. Over and over and over again, we would make these journeys, and sometimes they would last as long as three hours at a stretch. I insensibly fall into a general mention of these journeys as numerous, because it was at once settled that I should return every alternate day at noon for these purposes, and because I am now going to sum up a period of at least eight or ten months.
As we began to be more used to one another, Miss Kiley talked more to me, and asked me such questions as what had I learnt and what was I going to be? I told her I was going to be apprenticed to Stevie, I believed; and I enlarged upon my knowing nothing and wanting to know everything, in the hope that she might offer some help towards that desirable end. But, she did not;
on the contrary, she seemed to prefer my being ignorant. Neither did she ever give me any money—or anything but my daily dinner—nor ever stipulate that I should be paid for my services.
Ernest was always about, and always let me in and out, but never told me I might kiss her again. Sometimes, she would coldly tolerate me; sometimes, she would condescend to me; sometimes, she would be quite familiar with me; sometimes, she would tell me energetically that she hated me. Miss Kiley would often ask me in a whisper, or when we were alone, “Does she grow prettier and prettier, Kiara?” And when I said yes (for indeed she did), would seem to enjoy it greedily. Also, when we played at cards Miss Kiley would look on, with a miserly relish of Ernest’s moods, whatever they were. And sometimes, when her moods were so many and so contradictory of one another that I was puzzled what to say or do, Miss Kiley would embrace her with lavish fondness, murmuring something in her ear that sounded like “Break their hearts my pride and hope, break their hearts and have no mercy!”
There was a song Stevie used to hum fragments of at the forge, of which the burden was Old Clem. This was not a very ceremonious way of rendering homage to a patron saint; but, I believe Old Clem stood in that relation towards smiths. It was a song that imitated the measure of beating upon iron, and was a mere lyrical excuse for the introduction of Old Clem’s respected name. Thus, you were to hammer boys round—Old Clem! With a thump and a sound— Old Clem! Beat it out, beat it out—Old Clem! With a clink for the stout—Old Clem! Blow the fire, blow the fire—Old Clem! Roaring dryer, soaring higher—Old Clem! One day soon after the appearance of the chair, Miss Kiley suddenly saying to me, with the impatient movement of her fingers, “There, there, there!
Sing!” I was surprised into crooning this ditty as I pushed her over the floor. It happened so to catch her fancy, that she took it up in a low brooding voice as if she were singing in her sleep. After that, it became customary with us to have it as we moved about, and Ernest would often join in; though the whole strain was so subdued, even when there were three of us, that it made less noise in the grim old house than the lightest breath of wind.
What could I become with these surroundings? How could my character fail to be influenced by them? Is it to be wondered at if my thoughts were dazed, as my eyes were, when I came out into the natural light from the misty yellow rooms?
Perhaps, I might have told Stevie about the pale young gentleman, if I had not previously been betrayed into those enormous inventions to which I had confessed. Under the circumstances, I felt that Stevie could hardly fail to discern in the pale young gentleman, an appropriate passenger to be put into the black velvet coach; therefore, I said nothing of him. Besides: that shrinking from having Miss Kiley and Ernest discussed, which had come upon me in the beginning, grew much more potent as time went on. I reposed complete confidence in no one but Robyn; but, I told poor Robyn everything. Why it came natural to me to do so, and why Robyn had a deep concern in everything I told her, I did not know then, though I think I know now.
Meanwhile, councils went on in the kitchen at home, fraught with almost insupportable aggravation to my exasperated spirit.
That ass, Carley, used often to come over of a night for the purpose of discussing my prospects with my sister; and I really do believe (to this hour with less penitence than I ought to feel), that if these hands could have taken a linchpin out of his chaise-cart, they would have done it. The miserable man was a man of that confined stolidity of mind, that he could not discuss my prospects without having me before him—as it were, to operate upon—and he would drag me up from my stool (usually by the collar) where I was quiet in a corner, and, putting me before the fire as if I were going to be cooked, would begin by saying, “Now, Mum, here is this boy! Here is this boy which you brought up by hand. Hold up your head, boy, and be for ever grateful unto them which so did do. Now, Mum, with respections to this boy!” And then he would rumple my hair the wrong way—which from my earliest remembrance, as already hinted, I have in my soul denied the right of any fellow-creature to do—and would hold me before him by the sleeve: a spectacle of imbecility only to be equalled by himself.
Then, he and my sister would pair off in such nonsensical speculations about Miss Kiley, and about what she would do with me and for me, that I used to want—quite painfully—to burst into spiteful tears, fly at Carley, and pummel him all over.
In these dialogues, my sister spoke to me as if she were morally wrenching one of my teeth out at every reference; while Carley himself, self-constituted my patron, would sit supervising me with a depreciatory eye, like the architect of my fortunes who thought himself engaged on a very unremunerative job.
In these discussions, Stevie bore no part. But he was often talked at, while they were in progress, by reason of Mrs. Stevie’s perceiving that he was not favourable to my being taken from the forge. I was fully old enough now, to be apprenticed to Stevie; and when Stevie sat with the poker on his knees thoughtfully raking out the ashes between the lower bars, my sister would so distinctly construe that innocent action into opposition on his part, that she would dive at him, take the poker out of his hands, shake him, and put it away.
There was a most irritating end to every one of these debates. All in a moment, with nothing to lead up to it, my sister would stop herself in a yawn, and catching sight of me as it were incidentally, would swoop upon me with, “Come! there’s enough of you! You get along to bed; you’ve given trouble enough for one night, I hope!”
As if I had besought them as a favour to bother my life out.
We went on in this way for a long time, and it seemed likely that we should continue to go on in this way for a long time, when, one day, Miss Kiley stopped short as she and I were walking, she leaning on my shoulder; and said with some displeasure:
“You are growing tall, Kiara!”
I thought it best to hint, through the medium of a meditative look, that this might be occasioned by circumstances over which I had no control.
She said no more at the time; but, she presently stopped and looked at me again; and presently again; and after that, looked frowning and moody. On the next day of my attendance when our usual exercise was over, and I had landed her at her dressing￾table, she stayed me with a movement of her impatient fingers:
“Tell me the name again of that blacksmith of yours.”
“Stevie Bria, ma’am.”
“Meaning the master you were to be apprenticed to?”
“Yes, Miss Kiley.”
“You had better be apprenticed at once. Would Bria come here with you, and bring your indentures, do you think?”
I signified that I had no doubt he would take it as an honour to be asked.
“Then let him come.”
“At any particular time, Miss Kiley?”
“There, there! I know nothing about times. Let him come soon, and come along with you.”
When I got home at night, and delivered this message for Stevie, my sister “went on the Rampage,” in a more alarming degree than at any previous period. She asked me and Stevie whether we supposed she was door-mats under our feet, and how we dared to use her so, and what company we graciously thought she was fit for? When she had exhausted a torrent of such inquiries, she threw a candlestick at Stevie, burst into a loud sobbing, got out the dustpan—which was always a very bad sign—put on her coarse apron, and began cleaning up to a terrible extent. Not satisfied with a dry cleaning, she took to a pail and scrubbing-brush, and cleaned us out of house and home, so that we stood shivering in the back-yard. It was ten o’clock at night before we ventured to creep in again, and then she asked Stevie why he hadn’t married a Negress Slave at once? Stevie offered no answer, poor fellow, but stood feeling his whisker and looking dejectedly at me, as if he thought it really might have been a better speculation.
Chapter 13
t was a trial to my feelings, on the next day but one, to see Stevie arraying himself in his Sunday clothes to accompany me to Miss Kiley’s. However, as he thought his court-suit necessary to the occasion, it was not for me tell him that he looked far better in his working dress; the rather, because I knew he made himself so dreadfully uncomfortable, entirely on my account, and that it was for me he pulled up his shirt-collar so very high behind, that it made the hair on the crown of his head stand up like a tuft of feathers.
At breakfast time my sister declared her intention of going to town with us, and being left at Uncle Carley’s and called for “when we had done with our fine ladies”—a way of putting the case, from which Stevie appeared inclined to augur the worst. The forge was shut up for the day, and Stevie inscribed in chalk upon the door (as it was his custom to do on the very rare occasions when he was not at work) the monosyllable HOUT, accompanied by a sketch of an arrow supposed to be flying in the direction he had taken.
We walked to town, my sister leading the way in a very large beaver bonnet, and carrying a basket like the Great Seal of England in plaited straw, a pair of pattens, a spare shawl, and an umbrella, though it was a fine bright day. I am not quite clear whether these articles were carried penitentially or ostentatiously;
but, I rather think they were displayed as articles of property— much as Cleopatra or any other sovereign lady on the Rampage might exhibit her wealth in a pageant or procession.
When we came to Carley’s, my sister bounced in and left us. As it was almost noon, Stevie and I held straight on to Miss Kiley’s house. Ernest opened the gate as usual, and, the moment she appeared, Stevie took his hat off and stood weighing it by the brim in both his hands: as if he had some urgent reason in his mind for being particular to half a quarter of an ounce.
Ernest took no notice of either of us, but led us the way that I knew so well. I followed next to her, and Stevie came last. When I looked back at Stevie in the long passage, he was still weighing his hat with the greatest care, and was coming after us in long strides on the tips of his toes.
Ernest told me we were both to go in, so I took Stevie by the coat￾cuff and conducted him into Miss Kiley’s presence. She was seated at her dressing-table, and looked round at us immediately.
“Oh!” said she to Stevie. “You are the husband of the sister of this boy?”
I could hardly have imagined dear old Stevie looking so unlike himself or so like some extraordinary bird; standing, as he did, speechless, with his tuft of feathers ruffled, and his mouth open, as if he wanted a worm.
“You are the husband,” repeated Miss Kiley, “of the sister of this boy?”
It was very aggravating; but, throughout the interview Stevie persisted in addressing Me instead of Miss Kiley.
“Which I meantersay, Kiara,” Stevie now observed in a manner that was at once expressive of forcible argumentation, strict confidence, and great politeness, “as I hup and married your sister, and I were at the time what you might call (if you was anyways inclined) a single man.”
“Well!” said Miss Kiley. “And you have reared the boy, with the intention of taking him for your apprentice; is that so, Mr.
Bria?”
“You know, Kiara,” replied Stevie, “as you and me were ever friends, and it were looked for’ard to betwixt us, as being calc’lated to lead to larks. Not but what, Kiara, if you had ever made objections to the business—such as its being open to black and sut, or such-like—not but what they would have been attended to, don’t you see?”
“Has the boy,” said Miss Kiley, “ever made any objection?
Does he like the trade?”
“Which it is well beknown to yourself, Kiara,” returned Stevie, strengthening his former mixture of argumentation, confidence, and politeness, “that it were the wish of your own hart.” (I saw the idea suddenly break upon him that he would adapt his epitaph to the occasion, before he went on to say) “And there weren’t no objection on your part, and Kiara it were the great wish of your heart!”
It was quite in vain for me to endeavour to make him sensible that he ought to speak to Miss Kiley. The more I made faces and gestures to him to do it, the more confidential, argumentative, and polite, he persisted in being to Me.
“Have you brought his indentures with you?” asked Miss Kiley.
“Well, Kiara, you know,” replied Stevie, as if that were a little unreasonable, “you yourself see me put ’em in my ’at, and therefore you know as they are here.” With which he took them out, and gave them, not to Miss Kiley, but to me. I am afraid I was ashamed of the dear good fellow—I know I was ashamed of him—when I saw that Ernest stood at the back of Miss Kiley’s chair, and that her eyes laughed mischievously. I took the indentures out of his hand and gave them to Miss Kiley.
“You expected,” said Miss Kiley, as she looked them over, “no premium with the boy?”
“Stevie!” I remonstrated; for he made no reply at all. “Why don’t you answer—”
“Kiara,” returned Stevie, cutting me short as if he were hurt, “which I meantersay that were not a question requiring a answer betwixt yourself and me, and which you know the answer to be full well No. You know it to be No, Kiara, and wherefore should I say it?”
Miss Kiley glanced at him as if she understood what he really was, better than I had thought possible, seeing what he was there; and took up a little bag from the table beside her.
“Kiara has earned a premium here,” she said, “and here it is.
There are five-and-twenty guineas in this bag. Give it to your master, Kiara.”
As if he were absolutely out of his mind with the wonder awakened in him by her strange figure and the strange room, Stevie, even at this pass, persisted in addressing me.
“This is wery liberal on your part, Kiara,” said Stevie, “and it is as such received and grateful welcome, though never looked for, far nor near nor nowheres. And now, old chap,” said Stevie, conveying to me a sensation, first of burning and then of freezing, for I felt as if that familiar expression were applied to Miss Kiley; “and now, old chap, may we do our duty! May you and me do our duty, both on us by one and another, and by them which your liberal present—have—conweyed—to be—for the satisfaction of mind— of—them as never—” here Stevie showed that he felt he had fallen into frightful difficulties, until he triumphantly rescued himself with the words, “and from myself far be it!” These words had such a round and convincing sound for him that he said them twice.
“Good-bye, Kiara!” said Miss Kiley. “Let them out, Ernest.”
“Am I to come again, Miss Kiley?” I asked.
“No. Bria is your master now. Bria! One word!”
Thus calling him back as I went out of the door, I heard her say to Stevie, in a distinct emphatic voice, “The boy has been a good boy here, and that is his reward. Of course, as an honest man, you will expect no other and no more.”
How Stevie got out of the room, I have never been able to determine; but, I know that when he did get out he was steadily proceeding up-stairs instead of coming down, and was deaf to all remonstrances until I went after him and laid hold of him. In another minute we were outside the gate, and it was locked, and Ernest was gone.
When we stood in the daylight alone again, Stevie backed up against a wall, and said to me, “Astonishing!” And there he remained so long, saying “Astonishing” at intervals, so often, that I began to think his senses were never coming back. At length he prolonged his remark into “Kiara, I do assure you this is as-TON￾ishing!” and so, by degrees, became conversational and able to walk away.
I have reason to think that Stevie’s intellects were brightened by the encounter they had passed through, and that on our way to Carley’s he invented a subtle and deep design. My reason is to be found in what took place in Mr. Carley’s parlour:
where, on our presenting ourselves, my sister sat in conference with that detested seedsman.
“Well?” cried my sister, addressing us both at once. “And what’s happened to you? I wonder you condescend to come back to such poor society as this, I am sure I do!”
“Miss Kiley,” said Stevie, with a fixed look at me, like an effort of remembrance, “made it wery partick’ler that we should give her—were it compliments or respects, Kiara?”
“Compliments,” I said.
“Which that were my own belief,” answered Stevie—“her compliments to Mrs. J. Bria—”
“Much good they’ll do me!” observed my sister; but rather gratified too.
“And wishing,” pursued Stevie, with another fixed look at me, like another effort of remembrance, “that the state of Miss Kiley’s elth were sitch as would have—allowed, were it, Kiara?”
“Of her having the pleasure,” I added.
“Of ladies’ company,” said Stevie. And drew a long breath.
“Well!” cried my sister, with a mollified glance at Mr.
Carley. “She might have had the politeness to send that message at first, but it’s better late than never. And what did she give young Rantipole here?”
“She giv’ him,” said Stevie, “nothing.”
Mrs. Stevie was going to break out, but Stevie went on.
“What she giv’,” said Stevie, “she giv’ to his friends. ‘And by his friends,’ were her explanation, ‘I mean into the hands of his sister Mrs. J. Bria.’ Them were her words; ‘Mrs. J. Bria.’ She mayn’t have know’d,” added Stevie, with an appearance of reflection, “whether it were Stevie, or Jorge.”
My sister looked at Carley: who smoothed the elbows of his wooden armchair, and nodded at her and at the fire, as if he had known all about it beforehand.
“And how much have you got?” asked my sister, laughing.
Positively, laughing!
“What would present company say to ten pound?” demanded Stevie.
“They’d say,” returned my sister, curtly, “pretty well. Not too much, but pretty well.”
“It’s more than that, then,” said Stevie.
That fearful Impostor, Carley, immediately nodded, and said, as he rubbed the arms of his chair: “It’s more than that, Mum.”
“Why, you don’t mean to say—” began my sister.
“Yes I do, Mum,” said Carley; “but wait a bit. Go on, Joseph. Good in you! Go on!”
“What would present company say,” proceeded Stevie, “to twenty pound?”
“Handsome would be the word,” returned my sister.
“Well, then,” said Stevie, “It’s more than twenty pound.”
That abject hypocrite, Carley, nodded again, and said, with a patronizing laugh, “It’s more than that, Mum. Good again!
Follow her up, Joseph!”
“Then to make an end of it,” said Stevie, delightedly handing the bag to my sister; “it’s five-and-twenty pound.”
“It’s five-and-twenty pound, Mum,” echoed that basest of swindlers, Carley, rising to shake hands with her; “and it’s no more than your merits (as I said when my opinion was asked), and I wish you joy of the money!”
If the villain had stopped here, his case would have been sufficiently awful, but he blackened his guilt by proceeding to take me into custody, with a right of patronage that left all his former criminality far behind.
“Now you see, Joseph and wife,” said Carley, as he took me by the arm above the elbow, “I am one of them that always go right through with what they’ve begun. This boy must be bound, out of hand. That’s my way. Bound out of hand.”
“Goodness knows, Uncle Carley,” said my sister (grasping the money), “we’re deeply beholden to you.”
“Never mind me, Mum,” returned that diabolical corn￾chandler. “A pleasure’s a pleasure, all the world over. But this boy, you know; we must have him bound. I said I’d see to it—to tell you the truth.”
The Justices were sitting in the Town Hall near at hand, and we at once went over to have me bound apprentice to Stevie in the Magisterial presence. I say, we went over, but I was pushed over by Carley, exactly as if I had that moment picked a pocket or fired a rick; indeed, it was the general impression in Court that I had been taken red-handed, for, as Carley shoved me before him through the crowd, I heard some people say, “What’s he done?” and others, “He’s a young ’un, too, but looks bad, don’t he? One person of mild and benevolent aspect even gave me a tract ornamented with a woodcut of a malevolent young man fitted up with a perfect sausage-shop of fetters, and entitled, TO BE READ IN MY CELL.
The Hall was a queer place, I thought, with higher pews in it than a church—and with people hanging over the pews looking on—and with mighty Justices (one with a powdered head) leaning back in chairs, with folded arms, or taking snuff, or going to sleep, or writing, or reading the newspapers—and with some shining black portraits on the walls, which my unartistic eye regarded as a composition of hardbake and sticking-plaister. Here, in a corner, my indentures were duly signed and attested, and I was “bound;”
Mr. Carley holding me all the while as if we had looked in on our way to the scaffold, to have those little preliminaries disposed of.
When we had come out again, and had got rid of the boys who had been put into great spirits by the expectation of seeing me publicly tortured, and who were much disappointed to find that my friends were merely rallying round me, we went back to Carley’s. And there my sister became so excited by the twenty-five guineas, that nothing would serve her but we must have a dinner out of that windfall, at the Blue Boar, and that Carley must go over in his chaise-cart, and bring the Hubbles and Mr. Chantelle.
It was agreed to be done; and a most melancholy day I passed.
For, it inscrutably appeared to stand to reason, in the minds of the whole company, that I was an excrescence on the entertainment.
And to make it worse, they all asked me from time to time—in short, whenever they had nothing else to do—why I didn’t enjoy myself. And what could I possibly do then, but say I was enjoying myself—when I wasn’t?
However, they were grown up and had their own way, and they made the most of it. That swindling Carley, exalted into the beneficent contriver of the whole occasion, actually took the top of the table; and, when he addressed them on the subject of my being bound, and had fiendishly congratulated them on my being liable to imprisonment if I played at cards, drank strong liquors, kept late hours or bad company, or indulged in other vagaries which the form of my indentures appeared to contemplate as next to inevitable, he placed me standing on a chair beside him, to illustrate his remarks.
My only other remembrances of the great festival are, That they wouldn’t let me go to sleep, but whenever they saw me dropping off, woke me up and told me to enjoy myself. That, rather late in the evening Mr. Chantelle gave us Collins’s ode, and threw his bloodstain’d sword in thunder down, with such effect, that a waiter came in and said, “The Commercials underneath sent up their compliments, and it wasn’t the Tumblers’ Arms.” That, they were all in excellent spirits on the road home, and sang O Lady Fair! Mr. Chantelle taking the bass, and asserting with a tremendously strong voice (in reply to the inquisitive bore who leads that piece of music in a most impertinent manner, by wanting to know all about everybody’s private affairs) that he was the man with his white locks flowing, and that he was upon the whole the weakest pilgrim going.
Finally, I remember that when I got into my little bedroom I was truly wretched, and had a strong conviction on me that I should never like Stevie’s trade. I had liked it once, but once was not now.
Chapter 14
t is a most miserable thing to feel ashamed of home. There may be black ingratitude in the thing, and the punishment may be retributive and well deserved; but, that it is a miserable thing, I can testify.
Home had never been a very pleasant place to me, because of my sister’s temper. But, Stevie had sanctified it, and I had believed in it. I had believed in the best parlour as a most elegant saloon; I had believed in the front door, as a mysterious portal of the Temple of State whose solemn opening was attended with a sacrifice of roast fowls; I had believed in the kitchen as a chaste though not magnificent apartment; I had believed in the forge as the glowing road to manhood and independence. Within a single year, all this was changed. Now, it was all coarse and common, and I would not have had Miss Kiley and Ernest see it on any account.
How much of my ungracious condition of mind may have been my own fault, how much Miss Kiley’s, how much my sister’s, is now of no moment to me or to any one. The change was made in me; the thing was done. Well or ill done, excusably or inexcusably, it was done.
Once, it had seemed to me that when I should at last roll up my shirt-sleeves and go into the forge, Stevie’s ’prentice, I should be distinguished and happy. Now the reality was in my hold, I only felt that I was dusty with the dust of small coal, and that I had a weight upon my daily remembrance to which the anvil was a feather. There have been occasions in my later life (I suppose as in most lives) when I have felt for a time as if a thick curtain had fallen on all its interest and romance, to shut me out from anything save dull endurance any more. Never has that curtain dropped so heavy and blank, as when my way in life lay stretched out straight before me through the newly-entered road of apprenticeship to Stevie.
I remember that at a later period of my “time,” I used to stand about the churchyard on Sunday evenings when night was falling, comparing my own perspective with the windy marsh view, and making out some likeness between them by thinking how flat and low both were, and how on both there came an unknown way and a dark mist and then the sea. I was quite as dejected on the first working-day of my apprenticeship as in that after-time; but I am glad to know that I never breathed a murmur to Stevie while my indentures lasted. It is about the only thing I am glad to know of myself in that connection.
For, though it includes what I proceed to add, all the merit of what I proceed to add was Stevie’s. It was not because I was faithful, but because Stevie was faithful, that I never ran away and went for a soldier or a sailor. It was not because I had a strong sense of the virtue of industry, but because Stevie had a strong sense of the virtue of industry, that I worked with tolerable zeal against the grain. It is not possible to know how far the influence of any amiable honest￾hearted duty-doing man flies out into the world; but it is very possible to know how it has touched one’s self in going by, and I know right well, that any good that intermixed itself with my apprenticeship came of plain contented Stevie, and not of restlessly aspiring discontented me.
What I wanted, who can say? How can I say, when I never knew? What I dreaded was, that in some unlucky hour I, being at my grimiest and commonest, should lift up my eyes and see Ernest looking in at one of the wooden windows of the forge. I was haunted by the fear that she would, sooner or later, find me out, with a black face and hands, doing the coarsest part of my work, and would exult over me and despise me. Often after dark, when I was pulling the bellows for Stevie, and we were singing Old Clem, and when the thought how we used to sing it at Miss Kiley’s would seem to show me Ernest’s face in the fire, with her pretty hair fluttering in the wind and her eyes scorning me,—often at such a time I would look towards those panels of black night in the wall which the wooden windows then were, and would fancy that I saw her just drawing her face away, and would believe that she had come at last.
After that, when we went in to supper, the place and the meal would have a more homely look than ever, and I would feel more ashamed of home than ever, in my own ungracious breast.
Chapter 15
s I was getting too big for Mr. Chantelle’s great-aunt’s room, my education under that preposterous female terminated.
Not, however, until Robyn had imparted to me everything she knew, from the little catalogue of prices, to a comic song she had once bought for a halfpenny. Although the only coherent part of the latter piece of literature were the opening lines, When I went to Lunnon town sirs, Too rul loo rul
Too rul loo rul
Wasn’t I done very brown sirs?
Too rul loo rul
Too rul loo rul
—still, in my desire to be wiser, I got this composition by heart with the utmost gravity; nor do I recollect that I questioned its merit, except that I thought (as I still do) the amount of Too rul somewhat in excess of the poetry. In my hunger for information, I made proposals to Mr. Chantelle to bestow some intellectual crumbs upon me; with which he kindly complied. As it turned out, however, that he only wanted me for a dramatic lay-figure, to be contradicted and embraced and wept over and bullied and clutched and stabbed and knocked about in a variety of ways, I soon declined that course of instruction; though not until Mr.
Chantelle in his poetic fury had severely mauled me.
Whatever I acquired, I tried to impart to Stevie. This statement sounds so well, that I cannot in my conscience let it pass unexplained. I wanted to make Stevie less ignorant and common, that he might be worthier of my society and less open to Ernest’s reproach.
The old Battery out on the marshes was our place of study, and a broken slate and a short piece of slate pencil were our educational implements: to which Stevie always added a pipe of tobacco. I never knew Stevie to remember anything from one Sunday to another, or to acquire, under my tuition, any piece of information whatever. Yet he would smoke his pipe at the Battery with a far more sagacious air than anywhere else—even with a learned air—as if he considered himself to be advancing immensely. Dear fellow, I hope he did.
It was pleasant and quiet, out there with the sails on the river passing beyond the earthwork, and sometimes, when the tide was low, looking as if they belonged to sunken ships that were still sailing on at the bottom of the water. Whenever I watched the vessels standing out to sea with their white sails spread, I somehow thought of Miss Kiley and Ernest; and whenever the light struck aslant, afar off, upon a cloud or sail or green hill￾side or water-line, it was just the same. Miss Kiley and Ernest and the strange house and the strange life appeared to have something to do with everything that was picturesque.
One Sunday when Stevie, greatly enjoying his pipe, had so plumed himself on being “most awful dull,” that I had given him up for the day, I lay on the earthwork for some time with my chin on my hand, descrying traces of Miss Kiley and Ernest all over the prospect, in the sky and in the water, until at last I resolved to mention a thought concerning them that had been much in my head.
“Stevie,” said I; “don’t you think I ought to make Miss Kiley a visit?”
“Well, Kiara,” returned Stevie, slowly considering. “What for?”
“What for, Stevie? What is any visit made for?”
“There is some wisits, p’r’aps,” said Stevie, “as for ever remains open to the question, Kiara. But in regard to wisiting Miss Kiley. She might think you wanted something—expected something of her.”
“Don’t you think I might say that I did not, Stevie?”
“You might, old chap,” said Stevie. “And she might credit it.
Similarly she mightn’t.”
Stevie felt, as I did, that he had made a point there, and he pulled hard at his pipe to keep himself from weakening it by repetition.
“You see, Kiara,” Stevie pursued, as soon as he was past that danger, “Miss Kiley done the handsome thing by you. When Miss Kiley done the handsome thing by you, she called me back to say to me as that were all.”
“Yes, Stevie. I heard her.”
“ALL,” Stevie repeated, very emphatically.
“Yes, Stevie. I tell you, I heard her.”
“Which I meantersay, Kiara, it might be that her meaning were— Make a end on it!—As you was!—Me to the North, and you to the South!—Keep in sunders!”
I had thought of that too, and it was very far from comforting to me to find that he had thought of it; for it seemed to render it more probable.
“But, Stevie.”
“Yes, old chap.”
“Here am I, getting on in the first year of my time, and, since the day of my being bound, I have never thanked Miss Kiley, or asked after her, or shown that I remember her.”
“That’s true, Kiara; and unless you was to turn her out a set of shoes all four round—and which I meantersay as even a set of shoes all four round might not be acceptable as a present, in a total wacancy of hoofs—”
“I don’t mean that sort of remembrance, Stevie; I don’t mean a present.”
But Stevie had got the idea of a present in his head and must harp upon it. “Or even,” said he, “if you was helped to knocking her up a new chain for the front door—or say a gross or two of shark￾headed screws for general use—or some light fancy article, such as a toasting-fork when she took her muffins—or a gridiron when she took a sprat or such like—”
“I don’t mean any present at all, Stevie,” I interposed.
“Well,” said Stevie, still harping on it as though I had particularly pressed it, “if I was yourself, Kiara, I wouldn’t. No, I would not. For what’s a door-chain when she’s got one always up? And shark￾headers is open to misrepresentations. And if it was a toasting￾fork, you’d go into brass and do yourself no credit. And the oncommonest workman can’t show himself oncommon in a gridiron—for a gridiron is a gridiron,” said Stevie, steadfastly impressing it upon me, as if he were endeavouring to rouse me from a fixed delusion, “and you may haim at what you like, but a gridiron it will come out, either by your leave or again your leave, and you can’t help yourself—”
“My dear Stevie,” I cried, in desperation, taking hold of his coat, “don’t go on in that way. I never thought of making Miss Kiley any present.”
“No, Kiara,” Stevie assented, as if he had been contending for that, all along; “and what I say to you is, you are right, Kiara.”
“Yes, Stevie; but what I wanted to say, was, that as we are rather slack just now, if you would give me a half-holiday to-morrow, I think I would go up-town and make a call on Miss Est— Kiley.”
“Which her name,” said Stevie, gravely, “ain’t Estavisham, Kiara, unless she have been rechris’ened.”
“I know, Stevie, I know. It was a slip of mine. What do you think of it, Stevie?”
In brief, Stevie thought that if I thought well of it, he thought well of it. But, he was particular in stipulating that if I were not received with cordiality, or if I were not encouraged to repeat my visit as a visit which had no ulterior object but was simply one of gratitude for a favour received, then this experimental trip should have no successor. By these conditions I promised to abide.
Now, Stevie kept a journeyman at weekly wages whose name was Blaze. He pretended that his Christian name was Helene—a clear impossibility—but he was a fellow of that obstinate disposition that I believe him to have been the prey of no delusion in this particular, but wilfully to have imposed that name upon the village as an affront to its understanding. He was a broad-shouldered loose-limbed swarthy fellow of great strength, never in a hurry, and always slouching. He never even seemed to come to his work on purpose, but would slouch in as if by mere accident; and when he went to the Jolly Bargemen to eat his dinner, or went away at night, he would slouch out, like Cain or the Wandering Jew, as if he had no idea where he was going and no intention of ever coming back. He lodged at a sluice-keeper’s out on the marshes, and on working days would come slouching from his hermitage, with his hands in his pockets and his dinner loosely tied in a bundle round his neck and dangling on his back. On Sundays he mostly lay all day on the sluice-gates, or stood against ricks and barns. He always slouched, locomotively, with his eyes on the ground; and, when accosted or otherwise required to raise them, he looked up in a half resentful, half puzzled way, as though the only thought he ever had, was, that it was rather an odd and injurious fact that he should never be thinking.
This morose journeyman had no liking for me. When I was very small and timid, he gave me to understand that the Devil lived in a black corner of the forge, and that he knew the fiend very well:
also that it was necessary to make up the fire, once in seven years, with a live boy, and that I might consider myself fuel. When I became Stevie’s ’prentice, Blaze was perhaps confirmed in some suspicion that I should displace him; howbeit, he liked me still less. Not that he ever said anything, or did anything, openly importing hostility; I only noticed that he always beat his sparks in my direction, and that whenever I sang Old Clem, he came in out of time.
Helene Blaze was at work and present, next day, when I reminded Stevie of my half-holiday. He said nothing at the moment, for he and Stevie had just got a piece of hot iron between them, and I was at the bellows; but by-and-by he said, leaning on his hammer:
“Now, master! Sure you’re not a-going to favour only one of us.
If Young Kiara has a half-holiday, do as much for Old Blaze.” I suppose he was about five-and-twenty, but he usually spoke of himself as an ancient person.
“Why, what’ll you do with a half-holiday, if you get it?” said Stevie.
“What’ll I do with it! What’ll he do with it? I’ll do as much with it as him,” said Blaze.
“As to Kiara, he’s going up-town,” said Stevie.
“Well then, as to Old Blaze, he’s a-going up-town,” retorted that worthy. “Two can go up-town. Tan’t only one wot can go up-town.
“Don’t lose your temper,” said Stevie.
“Shall if I like,” growled Blaze. “Some and their up-towning!
Now, master! Come. No favouring in this shop. Be a man!”
The master refusing to entertain the subject until the journeyman was in a better temper, Blaze plunged at the furnace, drew out a red-hot bar, made at me with it as if he were going to run it through my body, whisked it round my head, laid it on the anvil, hammered it out—as if it were I, I thought, and the sparks were my spirting blood—and finally said, when he had hammered himself hot and the iron cold, and he again leaned on his hammer:
“Now, master!”
“Are you all right now?” demanded Stevie.
“Ah! I am all right,” said gruff Old Blaze.
“Then, as in general you stick to your work as well as most men,” said Stevie, “let it be a half-holiday for all.” My sister had been standing silent in the yard, within hearing—she was a most unscrupulous spy and listener—and she instantly looked in at one of the windows.
“Like you, you fool!” said she to Stevie, “giving holidays to great idle hulkers like that. You are a rich man, upon my life, to waste wages in that way. I wish I was his master!”
“You’d be everybody’s master, if you durst,” retorted Blaze, with an ill-favoured grin.
(“Let her alone,” said Stevie.)
“I’d be a match for all noodles and all rogues,” returned my sister, beginning to work herself into a mighty rage. “And I couldn’t be a match for the noodles, without being a match for your master, who’s the dunder-headed king of the noodles. And I couldn’t be a match for the rogues, without being a match for you, who are the blackest-looking and the worst rogue between this and France. Now!”
“You’re a foul shrew, Mother Bria, growled the journeyman. “If that makes a judge of rogues, you ought to be a good’un.”
(“Let her alone, will you?” said Stevie.)
“What did you say?” cried my sister, beginning to scream.
“What did you say? What did that fellow Blaze say to me, Kiara?
What did he call me, with my husband standing by? O! O! O!”
Each of these exclamations was a shriek; and I must remark of my sister, what is equally true of all the violent women I have ever seen, that passion was no excuse for her, because it is undeniable that instead of lapsing into passion, she consciously and deliberately took extraordinary pains to force herself into it, and became blindly furious by regular stages; “what was the name he gave me before the base man who swore to defend me? O! Hold me! O!”
“Ah-h-h!” growled the journeyman, between his teeth, “I’d hold you, if you was my wife. I’d hold you under the pump, and choke it out of you.”
(“I tell you, let her alone,” said Stevie.)
“Oh! To hear him!” cried my sister, with a clap of her hands and a scream together—which was her next stage. “To hear the names he’s giving me! That Blaze! In my own house! Me, a married woman! With my husband standing by! O! O!” Here my sister, after a fit of clappings and screamings, beat her hands upon her bosom and upon her knees, and threw her cap off, and pulled her hair down—which were the last stages on her road to frenzy.
Being by this time a perfect Fury and a complete success, she made a dash at the door, which I had fortunately locked.
What could the wretched Stevie do now, after his disregarded parenthetical interruptions, but stand up to his journeyman, and ask him what he meant by interfering betwixt himself and Mrs.
Stevie; and further whether he was man enough to come on? Old Blaze felt that the situation admitted of nothing less than coming on, and was on his defence straightway; so, without so much as pulling off their singed and burnt aprons, they went at one another, like two giants. But, if any man in that neighbourhood could stand up long against Stevie, I never saw the man. Blaze, as if he had been of no more account than the pale young gentleman, was very soon among the coal-dust, and in no hurry to come out of it. Then, Stevie unlocked the door and picked up my sister, who had dropped insensible at the window (but who had seen the fight first, I think), and who was carried into the house and laid down, and who was recommended to revive, and would do nothing but struggle and clench her hands in Stevie’s hair. Then, came that singular calm and silence which succeed all uproars; and then, with the vague sensation which I have always connected with such a lull—namely, that it was Sunday, and somebody was dead—I went up-stairs to dress myself.
When I came down again, I found Stevie and Blaze sweeping up, without any other traces of discomposure than a slit in one of Blaze’s nostrils, which was neither expressive nor ornamental. A pot of beer had appeared from the Jolly Bargemen, and they were sharing it by turns in a peaceable manner. The lull had a sedative and philosophical influence on Stevie, who followed me out into the road to say, as a parting observation that might do me good, “On the Rampage, Kiara, and off the Rampage, Kiara—such is Life!”
With what absurd emotions (for, we think the feelings that are very serious in a man quite comical in a boy) I found myself again going to Miss Kiley’s, matters little here. Nor, how I passed and repassed the gate many times before I could make up my mind to ring. Nor, how I debated whether I should go away without ringing; nor, how I should undoubtedly have gone, if my time had been my own, to come back.
Miss Sarah Bellatrix came to the gate. No Ernest.
“How, then? You here again?” said Miss Bellatrix. “What do you want?”
When I said that I only came to see how Miss Kiley was, Sarah evidently deliberated whether or no she should send me about my business. But, unwilling to hazard the responsibility, she let me in, and presently brought the sharp message that I was to “come up.”
Everything was unchanged, and Miss Kiley was alone.
“Well?” said she, fixing her eyes upon me. “I hope you want nothing? You’ll get nothing.”
“No, indeed, Miss Kiley. I only wanted you to know that I am doing very well in my apprenticeship, and am always much obliged to you.”
“There, there!” with the old restless fingers. “Come now and then; come on your birthday.—Ay!” she cried suddenly, turning herself and her chair towards me, “You are looking round for Ernest? Hey?”
I had been looking round—in fact, for Ernest—and I stammered that I hoped she was well.
“Abroad,” said Miss Kiley; “educating for a lady; far out of reach; prettier than ever; admired by all who see her. Do you feel that you have lost her?”
There was such a malignant enjoyment in her utterance of the last words, and she broke into such a disagreeable laugh, that I was at a loss what to say. She spared me the trouble of considering, by dismissing me. When the gate was closed upon me by Sarah of the walnut-shell countenance, I felt more than ever dissatisfied with my home and with my trade and with everything;
and that was all I took by that motion.
As I was loitering along the High-street, looking in disconsolately at the shop windows, and thinking what I would buy if I were a gentleman, who should come out of the bookshop but Mr. Chantelle. Mr Chantelle had in his hand the affecting tragedy of George Barnwell, in which he had that moment invested sixpence, with the view of heaping every word of it on the head of Carley, with whom he was going to drink tea. No sooner did he see me, than he appeared to consider that a special Providence had put a ’prentice in his way to be read at; and he laid hold of me, and insisted on my accompanying him to the Carleyian parlour. As I knew it would be miserable at home, and as the nights were dark and the way was dreary, and almost any companionship on the road was better than none, I made no great resistance; consequently, we turned into Carley’s just as the street and the shops were lighting up.
As I never assisted at any other representation of George Barnwell, I don’t know how long it may usually take; but I know very well that it took until half-past nine o’ clock that night, and that when Mr. Chantelle got into Newgate, I thought he never would go to the scaffold, he became so much slower than at any former period of his disgraceful career. I thought it a little too much that he should complain of being cut short in his flower after all, as if he had not been running to seed, leaf after leaf, ever since his course began. This, however, was a mere question of length and wearisomeness. What stung me, was the identification of the whole affair with my unoffending self. When Barnwell began to go wrong, I declare that I felt positively apologetic, Carley’s indignant stare so taxed me with it. Chantelle, too, took pains to present me in the worst light. At once ferocious and maudlin, I was made to murder my uncle with no extenuating circumstances whatever; Millwood put me down in argument, on every occasion;
it became sheer monomania in my master’s daughter to care a button for me; and all I can say for my gasping and procrastinating conduct on the fatal morning, is, that it was worthy of the general feebleness of my character. Even after I was happily hanged and Chantelle had closed the book, Carley sat staring at me, and shaking his head, and saying, “Take warning, boy, take warning!”
as if it were a well-known fact that I contemplated murdering a near relation, provided I could only induce one to have the weakness to become my benefactor.
It was a very dark night when it was all over, and when I set out with Mr. Chantelle on the walk home. Beyond town, we found a heavy mist out, and it fell wet and thick. The turnpike lamp was a blur, quite out of the lamp’s usual place apparently, and its rays looked solid substance on the fog. We were noticing this, and saying how that the mist rose with a change of wind from a certain quarter of our marshes, when we came upon a man, slouching under the lee of the turnpike house.
“Halloa!” we said, stopping. “Blaze, there?”
“Ah!” he answered, slouching out. “I was standing by, a minute, on the chance of company.”
“You are late,” I remarked.
Blaze not unnaturally answered, “Well? And you’re late.”
“We have been,” said Mr. Chantelle, exalted with his late performance, “we have been indulging, Mr. Blaze, in an intellectual evening.”
Old Blaze growled, as if he had nothing to say about that, and we all went on together. I asked him presently whether he had been spending his half-holiday up and down town?
“Yes,” said he, “all of it. I come in behind yourself. I didn’t see you, but I must have been pretty close behind you. By-the-bye, the guns is going again.”
“At the Hulks?” said I.
“Ay! There’s some of the birds flown from the cages. The guns have been going since dark, about. You’ll hear one presently.”
In effect, we had not walked many yards further, when the well￾remembered boom came towards us, deadened by the mist, and heavily rolled away along the low grounds by the river, as if it were pursuing and threatening the fugitives.
“A good night for cutting off in,” said Blaze. “We’d be puzzled how to bring down a jail-bird on the wing, to-night.”
The subject was a suggestive one to me, and I thought about it in silence. Mr. Chantelle, as the ill-requited uncle of the evening’s tragedy, fell to meditating aloud in his garden at Camberwell.
Blaze, with his hands in his pockets, slouched heavily at my side.
It was very dark, very wet, very muddy, and so we splashed along.
Now and then, the sound of the signal cannon broke upon us again, and again rolled sulkily along the course of the river. I kept myself to myself and my thoughts. Mr. Chantelle died amiably at Camberwell, and exceedingly game on Bosworth Field, and in the greatest agonies at Glastonbury. Blaze sometimes growled, “Beat it out, beat it out—Old Clem! With a clink for the stout—Old Clem!” I thought he had been drinking, but he was not drunk.
Thus, we came to the village. The way by which we approached it, took us past the Three Jolly Bargemen, which we were surprised to find—it being eleven o’clock—in a state of commotion, with the door wide open, and unwonted lights that had been hastily caught up and put down, scattered about. Mr.
Chantelle dropped in to ask what was the matter (surmising that a convict had been taken), but came running out in a great hurry.
“There’s something wrong,” said he, without stopping, “up at your place, Kiara. Run all!”
“What is it?” I asked, keeping up with him. So did Blaze, at my side.
“I can’t quite understand. The house seems to have been violently entered when Stevie Bria was out. Supposed by convicts. Somebody has been attacked and hurt.”
We were running too fast to admit of more being said, and we made no stop until we got into our kitchen. It was full of people;
the whole village was there, or in the yard; and there was a surgeon, and there was Stevie, and there was a group of women, all on the floor in the midst of the kitchen. The unemployed bystanders drew back when they saw me, and so I became aware of my sister—lying without sense or movement on the bare boards where she had been knocked down by a tremendous blow on the back of the head, dealt by some unknown hand when her face was turned towards the fire—destined never to be on the Rampage again, while she was the wife of Stevie.
Chapter 16
ith my head full of George Barnwell, I was at first disposed to believe that I must have had some hand in the attack upon my sister, or at all events that as her near relation, popularly known to be under obligations to her, I was a more legitimate object of suspicion than any one else. But when, in the clearer light of next morning, I began to reconsider the matter and to hear it discussed around me on all sides, I took another view of the case, which was more reasonable.
Stevie had been at the Three Jolly Bargemen, smoking his pipe, from a quarter after eight o’clock to a quarter before ten. While he was there, my sister had been seen standing at the kitchen door, and had exchanged Good Night with a farm-labourer going home.
The man could not be more particular as to the time at which he saw her (he got into dense confusion when he tried to be), than that it must have been before nine. When Stevie went home at five minutes before ten, he found her struck down on the floor, and promptly called in assistance. The fire had not then burnt unusually low, nor was the snuff of the candle very long; the candle, however, had been blown out.
Nothing had been taken away from any part of the house.
Neither, beyond the blowing out of the candle—which stood on a table between the door and my sister, and was behind her when she stood facing the fire and was struck—was there any disarrangement of the kitchen, excepting such as she herself had made, in falling and bleeding. But, there was one remarkable piece of evidence on the spot. She had been struck with something blunt and heavy, on the head and spine; after the blows were dealt, something heavy had been thrown down at her with considerable violence, as she lay on her face. And on the ground beside her, when Stevie picked her up, was a convict’s leg-iron which had been filed asunder.
Now, Stevie, examining this iron with a smith’s eye, declared it to have been filed asunder some time ago. The hue and cry going off to the Hulks, and people coming thence to examine the iron, Stevie’s opinion was corroborated. They did not undertake to say when it had left the prison-ships to which it undoubtedly had once belonged; but they claimed to know for certain that that particular manacle had not been worn by either of the two convicts who had escaped last night. Further, one of those two was already re-taken, and had not freed himself of his iron.
Knowing what I knew, I set up an inference of my own here. I believed the iron to be my convict’s iron—the iron I had seen and heard him filing at, on the marshes—but my mind did not accuse him of having put it to its latest use. For, I believed one of two other persons to have become possessed of it, and to have turned it to this cruel account. Either Blaze, or the strange man who had shown me the file.
Now, as to Blaze; he had gone to town exactly as he told us when we picked him up at the turnpike, he had been seen about town all the evening, he had been in divers companies in several public-houses, and he had come back with myself and Mr. Chantelle.
There was nothing against him, save the quarrel; and my sister had quarrelled with him, and with everybody else about her, ten thousand times. As to the strange man; if he had come back for his two bank-notes there could have been no dispute about them, because my sister was fully prepared to restore them. Besides, there had been no altercation; the assailant had come in so silently and suddenly, that she had been felled before she could look round.
It was horrible to think that I had provided the weapon, however undesignedly, but I could hardly think otherwise. I suffered unspeakable trouble while I considered and reconsidered whether I should at last dissolve that spell of my childhood, and tell Stevie all the story. For months afterwards, I every day settled the question finally in the negative, and reopened and reargued it next morning. The contention came, after all, to this;—the secret was such an old one now, had so grown into me and become a part of myself, that I could not tear it away. In addition to the dread that, having led up to so much mischief, it would be now more likely than ever to alienate Stevie from me if he believed it, I had a further restraining dread that he would not believe it, but would assort it with the fabulous dogs and veal-cutlets as a monstrous invention. However, I temporized with myself, of course—for, was I not wavering between right and wrong, when the thing is always done?—and resolved to make a full disclosure if I should see any such new occasion as a new chance of helping in the discovery of the assailant.
The Constables, and the Bow Street men from Nigeria—for, this happened in the days of the extinct red-waistcoated police— were about the house for a week or two, and did pretty much what I have heard and read of like authorities doing in other such cases.
They took up several obviously wrong people, and they ran their heads very hard against wrong ideas, and persisted in trying to fit the circumstances to the ideas, instead of trying to extract ideas from the circumstances. Also, they stood about the door of the Jolly Bargemen, with knowing and reserved looks that filled the whole neighbourhood with admiration; and they had a mysterious manner of taking their drink, that was almost as good as taking the culprit. But not quite, for they never did it.
Long after these constitutional powers had dispersed, my sister lay very ill in bed. Her sight was disturbed, so that she saw objects multiplied, and grasped at visionary teacups and wine-glasses instead of the realities; her hearing was greatly impaired; her memory also; and her speech was unintelligible. When, at last, she came round so far as to be helped down-stairs, it was still necessary to keep my slate always by her, that she might indicate in writing what she could not indicate in speech. As she was (very bad handwriting apart) a more than indifferent speller, and as Stevie was a more than indifferent reader, extraordinary complications arose between them, which I was always called in to solve. The administration of mutton instead of medicine, the substitution of Tea for Stevie, and the baker for bacon, were among the mildest of my own mistakes.
However, her temper was greatly improved, and she was patient. A tremulous uncertainty of the action of all her limbs soon became a part of her regular state, and afterwards, at intervals of two or three months, she would often put her hands to her head, and would then remain for about a week at a time in some gloomy aberration of mind. We were at a loss to find a suitable attendant for her, until a circumstance happened conveniently to relieve us.
Mr. Chantelle’s great-aunt conquered a confirmed habit of living into which she had fallen, and Robyn became a part of our establishment.
It may have been about a month after my sister’s reappearance in the kitchen, when Robyn came to us with a small speckled box containing the whole of her worldly effects, and became a blessing to the household. Above all, she was a blessing to Stevie, for the dear old fellow was sadly cut up by the constant contemplation of the wreck of his wife, and had been accustomed, while attending on her of an evening, to turn to me every now and then and say, with his blue eyes moistened, “Such a fine figure of a woman as she once were, Kiara!” Robyn instantly taking the cleverest charge of her as though she had studied her from infancy, Stevie became able in some sort to appreciate the greater quiet of his life, and to get down to the Jolly Bargemen now and then for a change that did him good. It was characteristic of the police people that they had all more or less suspected poor Stevie (though he never knew it), and that they had to a man concurred in regarding him as one of the deepest spirits they had ever encountered.
Robyn’s first triumph in her new office, was to solve a difficulty that had completely vanquished me. I had tried hard at it, but had made nothing of it. Thus it was:
Again and again and again, my sister had traced upon the slate, a character that looked like a curious T, and then with the utmost eagerness had called our attention to it as something she particularly wanted. I had in vain tried everything producible that began with a T, from tar to toast and tub. At length it had come into my head that the sign looked like a hammer, and on my lustily calling that word in my sister’s ear, she had begun to hammer on the table and had expressed a qualified assent. Thereupon, I had brought in all our hammers, one after another, but without avail.
Then I bethought me of a crutch, the shape being much the same, and I borrowed one in the village, and displayed it to my sister with considerable confidence. But she shook her head to that extent when she was shown it, that we were terrified lest in her weak and shattered state she should dislocate her neck.
When my sister found that Robyn was very quick to understand her, this mysterious sign reappeared on the slate. Robyn looked thoughtfully at it, heard my explanation, looked thoughtfully at my sister, looked thoughtfully at Stevie (who was always represented on the slate by his initial letter), and ran into the forge, followed by Stevie and me.
“Why, of course!” cried Robyn, with an exultant face. “Don’t you see? It’s him!”
Blaze, without a doubt! She had lost his name, and could only signify him by his hammer. We told him why we wanted him to come into the kitchen, and he slowly laid down his hammer, wiped his brow with his arm, took another wipe at it with his apron, and came slouching out, with a curious loose vagabond bend in the knees that strongly distinguished him.
I confess that I expected to see my sister denounce him, and that I was disappointed by the different result. She manifested the greatest anxiety to be on good terms with him, was evidently much pleased by his being at length produced, and motioned that she would have him given something to drink. She watched his countenance as if she were particularly wishful to be assured that he took kindly to his reception, she showed every possible desire to conciliate him, and there was an air of humble propitiation in all she did, such as I have seen pervade the bearing of a child towards a hard master. After that day, a day rarely passed without her drawing the hammer on her slate, and without Blaze’s slouching in and standing doggedly before her, as if he knew no more than I did what to make of it.
Chapter 17
now fell into a regular routine of apprenticeship life, which was varied, beyond the limits of the village and the marshes, by no more remarkable circumstance than the arrival of my birthday and my paying another visit to Miss Kiley. I found Miss Sarah Bellatrix still on duty at the gate, I found Miss Kiley just as I had left her, and she spoke of Ernest in the very same way, if not in the very same words. The interview lasted but a few minutes, and she gave me a guinea when I was going, and told me to come again on my next birthday. I may mention at once that this became an annual custom. I tried to decline taking the guinea on the first occasion, but with no better effect than causing her to ask me very angrily, if I expected more? Then, and after that, I took it.
So unchanging was the dull old house, the yellow light in the darkened room, the faded spectre in the chair by the dressing￾table glass, that I felt as if the stopping of the clocks had stopped Time in that mysterious place, and, while I and everything else outside it grew older, it stood still. Daylight never entered the house as to my thoughts and remembrances of it, any more than as to the actual fact. It bewildered me, and under its influence I continued at heart to hate my trade and to be ashamed of home.
Imperceptibly I became conscious of a change in Robyn, however. Her shoes came up at the heel, her hair grew bright and neat, her hands were always clean. She was not beautiful—she was common, and could not be like Ernest—but she was pleasant and wholesome and sweet-tempered. She had not been with us more than a year (I remember her being newly out of mourning at the time it struck me), when I observed to myself one evening that she had curiously thoughtful and attentive eyes; eyes that were very pretty and very good.
It came of my lifting up my own eyes from a task I was poring at—writing some passages from a book, to improve myself in two ways at once by a sort of stratagem—and seeing Robyn observant of what I was about. I laid down my pen, and Robyn stopped in her needlework without laying it down.
“Robyn,” said I, “how do you manage it? Either I am very stupid, or you are very clever.”
“What is it that I manage? I don’t know,” returned Robyn, smiling.
She managed our whole domestic life, and wonderfully too; but I did not mean that, though that made what I did mean, more surprising.
“How do you manage, Robyn,” said I, “to learn everything that I learn, and always to keep up with me?” I was beginning to be rather vain of my knowledge, for I spent my birthday guineas on it, and set aside the greater part of my pocket-money for similar investment; though I have no doubt, now, that the little I knew was extremely dear at the price.
“I might as well ask you,” said Robyn, “how you manage?”
“No; because when I come in from the forge of a night, any one can see me turning to at it. But you never turn to at it, Robyn.”
“I suppose I must catch it—like a cough,” said Robyn, quietly;
and went on with her sewing.
Pursuing my idea as I leaned back in my wooden chair and looked at Robyn sewing away with her head on one side, I began to think her rather an extraordinary girl. For, I called to mind now, that she was equally accomplished in the terms of our trade, and the names of our different sorts of work, and our various tools. In short, whatever I knew, Robyn knew. Theoretically, she was already as good a blacksmith as I, or better.
“You are one of those, Robyn,” said I, “who make the most of every chance. You never had a chance before you came here, and see how improved you are!”
Robyn looked at me for an instant, and went on with her sewing.
“I was your first teacher though; wasn’t I?” said she, as she sewed.
“Robyn!” I exclaimed, in amazement. “Why, you are crying!”
“No I am not,” said Robyn, looking up and laughing. “What put that in your head?”
What could have put it in my head, but the glistening of a tear as it dropped on her work? I sat silent, recalling what a drudge she had been until Mr. Chantelle’s great-aunt successfully overcame that bad habit of living, so highly desirable to be got rid of by some people. I recalled the hopeless circumstances by which she had been surrounded in the miserable little shop and the miserable little noisy evening school, with that miserable old bundle of incompetence always to be dragged and shouldered. I reflected that even in those untoward times there must have been latent in Robyn what was now developing, for, in my first uneasiness and discontent I had turned to her for help, as a matter of course.
Robyn sat quietly sewing, shedding no more tears, and while I looked at her and thought about it all, it occurred to me that perhaps I had not been sufficiently grateful to Robyn. I might have been too reserved, and should have patronized her more (though I did not use that precise word in my meditations), with my confidence.
“Yes, Robyn,” I observed, when I had done turning it over, “you were my first teacher, and that at a time when we little thought of ever being together like this, in this kitchen.”
“Ah, poor thing!” replied Robyn. It was like her self￾forgetfulness, to transfer the remark to my sister, and to get up and be busy about her, making her more comfortable; “that’s sadly true!”
“Well!” said I, “we must talk together a little more, as we used to do. And I must consult you a little more, as I used to do. Let us have a quiet walk on the marshes next Sunday, Robyn, and a long chat.”
My sister was never left alone now; but Stevie more than readily undertook the care of her on that Sunday afternoon, and Robyn and I went out together. It was summer-time, and lovely weather.
When we had passed the village and the church and the churchyard, and were out on the marshes and began to see the sails of the ships as they sailed on, I began to combine Miss Kiley and Ernest with the prospect, in my usual way. When we came to the river-side and sat down on the bank, with the water rippling at our feet, making it all more quiet than it would have been without that sound, I resolved that it was a good time and place for the admission of Robyn into my inner confidence.
“Robyn,” said I, after binding her to secrecy, “I want to be a gentleman.”
“Oh, I wouldn’t, if I was you!” she returned. “I don’t think it would answer.”
“Robyn,” said I, with some severity, “I have particular reasons for wanting to be a gentleman.”
“You know best, Kiara; but don’t you think you are happier as you are?”
“Robyn,” I exclaimed, impatiently, “I am not at all happy as I am. I am disgusted with my calling and with my life. I have never taken to either, since I was bound. Don’t be absurd.”
“Was I absurd?” said Robyn, quietly raising her eyebrows; “I am sorry for that; I didn’t mean to be. I only want you to do well, and to be comfortable.”
“Well then, understand once for all that I never shall or can be comfortable—or anything but miserable—there, Robyn!—unless I can lead a very different sort of life from the life I lead now.”
“That’s a pity!” said Robyn, shaking her head with a sorrowful air.
Now, I too had so often thought it a pity, that, in the singular kind of quarrel with myself which I was always carrying on, I was half inclined to shed tears of vexation and distress when Robyn gave utterance to her sentiment and my own. I told her she was right, and I knew it was much to be regretted, but still it was not to be helped.
“If I could have settled down,” I said to Robyn, plucking up the short grass within reach, much as I had once upon a time pulled my feelings out of my hair and kicked them into the brewery wall:
“if I could have settled down and been but half as fond of the forge as I was when I was little, I know it would have been much better for me. You and I and Stevie would have wanted nothing then, and Stevie and I would perhaps have gone partners when I was out of my time, and I might even have grown up to keep company with you, and we might have sat on this very bank on a fine Sunday, quite different people. I should have been good enough for you;
shouldn’t I, Robyn?”
Robyn sighed as she looked at the ships sailing on, and returned for answer, “Yes; I am not over-particular.” It scarcely sounded flattering, but I knew she meant well.
“Instead of that,” said I, plucking up more grass and chewing a blade or two, “see how I am going on. Dissatisfied, and uncomfortable, and—what would it signify to me, being coarse and common, if nobody had told me so!”
Robyn turned her face suddenly towards mine, and looked far more attentively at me than she had looked at the sailing ships.
“It was neither a very true nor a very polite thing to say,” she remarked, directing her eyes to the ships again. “Who said it?”
I was disconcerted, for I had broken away without quite seeing where I was going to. It was not to be shuffled off now, however, and I answered, “The beautiful young lady at Miss Kiley’s, and she’s more beautiful than anybody ever was, and I admire her dreadfully, and I want to be a gentleman on her account.” Having made this lunatic confession, I began to throw my torn-up grass into the river, as if I had some thoughts of following it.
“Do you want to be a gentleman, to spite her or to gain her over?” Robyn quietly asked me, after a pause.
“I don’t know,” I moodily answered.
“Because, if it is to spite her,” Robyn pursued, “I should think— but you know best—that might be better and more independently done by caring nothing for her words. And if it is to gain her over, I should think—but you know best—she was not worth gaining over.”
Exactly what I myself had thought, many times. Exactly what was perfectly manifest to me at the moment. But how could I, a poor dazed village lad, avoid that wonderful inconsistency into which the best and wisest of men fall every day?
“It may be all quite true,” said I to Robyn, “but I admire her dreadfully.”
In short, I turned over on my face when I came to that, and got a good grasp on the hair on each side of my head, and wrenched it well. All the while knowing the madness of my heart to be so very mad and misplaced, that I was quite conscious it would have served my face right, if I had lifted it up by my hair, and knocked it against the pebbles as a punishment for belonging to such an idiot.
Robyn was the wisest of girls, and she tried to reason no more with me. She put her hand, which was a comfortable hand though roughened by work, upon my hands, one after another, and gently took them out of my hair. Then she softly patted my shoulder in a soothing way, while with my face upon my sleeve I cried a little— exactly as I had done in the brewery yard—and felt vaguely convinced that I was very much ill-used by somebody, or by everybody; I can’t say which.
“I am glad of one thing,” said Robyn, “and that is, that you have felt you could give me your confidence, Kiara. And I am glad of another thing, and that is, that of course you know you may depend upon my keeping it and always so far deserving it. If your first teacher (dear! such a poor one, and so much in need of being taught herself!) had been your teacher at the present time, she thinks she knows what lesson she would set. But It would be a hard one to learn, and you have got beyond her, and it’s of no use now.” So, with a quiet sigh for me, Robyn rose from the bank, and said, with a fresh and pleasant change of voice, “Shall we walk a little further, or go home?”
“Robyn,” I cried, getting up, putting my arm round her neck, and giving her a kiss, “I shall always tell you everything.”
“Till you’re a gentleman,” said Robyn.
“You know I never shall be, so that’s always. Not that I have any occasion to tell you anything, for you know everything I know—as I told you at home the other night.”
“Ah!” said Robyn, quite in a whisper, as she looked away at the ships. And then repeated, with her former pleasant change; “shall we walk a little further, or go home?”
I said to Robyn we would walk a little further, and we did so, and the summer afternoon toned down into the summer evening, and it was very beautiful. I began to consider whether I was not more naturally and wholesomely situated, after all, in these circumstances, than playing beggar my neighbour by candlelight in the room with the stopped clocks, and being despised by Ernest. I thought it would be very good for me if I could get her out of my head, with all the rest of those remembrances and fancies, and could go to work determined to relish what I had to do, and stick to it, and make the best of it. I asked myself the question whether I did not surely know that if Ernest were beside me at that moment instead of Robyn, she would make me miserable? I was obliged to admit that I did know it for a certainty, and I said to myself, “Kiara, what a fool you are!”
We talked a good deal as we walked, and all that Robyn said seemed right. Robyn was never insulting, or capricious, or Robyn to-day and somebody else to-morrow; she would have derived only pain, and no pleasure, from giving me pain; she would far rather have wounded her own breast than mine. How could it be, then, that I did not like her much the better of the two?
“Robyn,” said I, when we were walking homeward, “I wish you could put me right.”
“I wish I could!” said Robyn.
“If I could only get myself to fall in love with you—you don’t mind my speaking so openly to such an old acquaintance?”
“Oh dear, not at all!” said Robyn. “Don’t mind me.”
“If I could only get myself to do it, that would be the thing for me.”
“But you never will, you see,” said Robyn.
It did not appear quite so unlikely to me that evening, as it would have done if we had discussed it a few hours before. I therefore observed I was not quite sure of that. But Robyn said she was, and she said it decisively. In my heart I believed her to be right; and yet I took it rather ill, too, that she should be so positive on the point.
When we came near the churchyard, we had to cross an embankment, and get over a stile near a sluice gate. There started up, from the gate, or from the rushes, or from the ooze (which was quite in his stagnant way), Old Blaze.
“Halloa!” he growled, “where are you two going?”
“Where should we be going, but home?”
“Well then,” said he, “I’m jiggered if I don’t see you home!”
This penalty of being jiggered was a favourite supposititious case of his. He attached no definite meaning to the word that I am aware of, but used it, like his own pretended Christian name, to affront mankind, and convey an idea of something savagely damaging. When I was younger, I had had a general belief that if he had jiggered me personally, he would have done it with a sharp and twisted hook.
Robyn was much against his going with us, and said to me in a whisper, “Don’t let him come; I don’t like him.” As I did not like him either, I took the liberty of saying that we thanked him, but we didn’t want seeing home. He received that piece of information with a yell of laughter, and dropped back, but came slouching after us at a little distance.
Curious to know whether Robyn suspected him of having had a hand in that murderous attack of which my sister had never been able to give any account, I asked her why she did not like him.
“Oh!” she replied, glancing over her shoulder as he slouched after us, “because I—I am afraid he likes me.”
“Did he ever tell you he liked you?” I asked, indignantly.
“No,” said Robyn, glancing over her shoulder again, “he never told me so; but he dances at me, whenever he can catch my eye.”
However novel and peculiar this testimony of attachment, I did not doubt the accuracy of the interpretation. I was very hot indeed upon Old Blaze’s daring to admire her; as hot as if it were an outrage on myself.
“But it makes no difference to you, you know,” said Robyn, calmly.
“No, Robyn, it makes no difference to me; only I don’t like it; I don’t approve of it.”
“Nor I neither,” said Robyn. “Though that makes no difference to you.”
“Exactly,” said I; “but I must tell you I should have no opinion of you, Robyn, if he danced at you with your own consent.”
I kept an eye on Blaze after that night, and, whenever circumstances were favourable to his dancing at Robyn, got before him, to obscure that demonstration. He had struck root in Stevie’s establishment, by reason of my sister’s sudden fancy for him, or I should have tried to get him dismissed. He quite understood and reciprocated my good intentions, as I had reason to know thereafter.
And now, because my mind was not confused enough before, I complicated its confusion fifty thousand-fold, by having states and seasons when I was clear that Robyn was immeasurably better than Ernest, and that the plain honest working life to which I was born, had nothing in it to be ashamed of, but offered me sufficient means of self-respect and happiness. At those times, I would decide conclusively that my disaffection to dear old Stevie and the forge, was gone, and that I was growing up in a fair way to be partners with Stevie and to keep company with Robyn—when all in a moment some confounding remembrance of the Kiley days would fall upon me, like a destructive missile, and scatter my wits again. Scattered wits take a long time picking up; and often, before I had got them well together, they would be dispersed in all directions by one stray thought, that perhaps after all Miss Kiley was going to make my fortune when my time was out.
If my time had run out, it would have left me still at the height of my perplexities, I dare say. It never did run out, however, but was brought to a premature end, as I proceed to relate.
Chapter 18
t was in the fourth year of my apprenticeship to Stevie, and it was a Saturday night. There was a group assembled round the fire at the Three Jolly Bargemen, attentive to Mr. Chantelle as he read the newspaper aloud. Of that group I was one.
A highly popular murder had been committed, and Mr. Chantelle was imbrued in blood to the eyebrows. He gloated over every abhorrent adjective in the description, and identified himself with every witness at the Inquest. He faintly moaned, “I am done for,”
as the victim, and he barbarously bellowed, “I’ll serve you out,” as the murderer. He gave the medical testimony, in pointed imitation of our local practitioner; and he piped and shook, as the aged turnpike-keeper who had heard blows, to an extent so very paralytic as to suggest a doubt regarding the mental competency of that witness. The coroner, in Mr. Chantelle’s hands, became Timon of Athens; the beadle, Coriolanus. He enjoyed himself thoroughly, and we all enjoyed ourselves, and were delightfully comfortable. In this cozy state of mind we came to the verdict Wilful Murder.
Then, and not sooner, I became aware of a strange gentleman leaning over the back of the settle opposite me, looking on. There was an expression of contempt on his face, and he bit the side of a great forefinger as he watched the group of faces.
“Well!” said the stranger to Mr. Chantelle, when the reading was done, “you have settled it all to your own satisfaction, I have no doubt?”
Everybody started and looked up, as if it were the murderer. He looked at everybody coldly and sarcastically.
“Guilty, of course?” said he. “Out with it. Come!”
“Sir,” returned Mr. Chantelle, “without having the honour of your acquaintance, I do say Guilty.” Upon this, we all took courage to unite in a confirmatory murmur.
“I know you do,” said the stranger; “I knew you would. I told you so. But now I’ll ask you a question. Do you know, or do you not know, that the law of England supposes every man to be innocent, until he is proved—proved—to be guilty?”
“Sir,” Mr. Chantelle began to reply, “as an Englishman myself, I— ”
“Come!” said the stranger, biting his forefinger at him. “Don’t evade the question. Either you know it, or you don’t know it.
Which is it to be?”
He stood with his head on one side and himself on one side, in a bullying interrogative manner, and he threw his forefinger at Mr.
Chantelle—as it were to mark him out—before biting it again.
“Now!” said he. “Do you know it, or don’t you know it?”
“Certainly I know it,” replied Mr. Chantelle.
“Certainly you know it. Then why didn’t you say so at first?
Now, I’ll ask you another question;” taking possession of Mr.
Chantelle, as if he had a right to him. “Do you know that none of these witnesses have yet been cross-examined?”
Mr. Chantelle was beginning, “I can only say—” when the stranger stopped him.
“What? You won’t answer the question, yes or no? Now, I’ll try you again.” Throwing his finger at him again. “Attend to me. Are you aware, or are you not aware, that none of these witnesses have yet been cross-examined? Come, I only want one word from you.
Yes, or no?”
Mr. Chantelle hesitated, and we all began to conceive rather a poor opinion of him.
“Come!” said the stranger, “I’ll help you. You don’t deserve help, but I’ll help you. Look at that paper you hold in your hand.
What is it?”
“What is it?” repeated Mr. Chantelle, eyeing it, much at a loss.
“Is it,” pursued the stranger in his most sarcastic and suspicious manner, “the printed paper you have just been reading from?”
“Undoubtedly.”
“Undoubtedly. Now, turn to that paper, and tell me whether it distinctly states that the prisoner expressly said that his legal advisers instructed him altogether to reserve his defence?”
“I read that just now,” Mr. Chantelle pleaded.
“Never mind what you read just now, sir; I don’t ask you what you read just now. You may read the Lord’s Prayer backwards, if you like—and, perhaps, have done it before to-day. Turn to the paper. No, no, no my friend; not to the top of the column; you know better than that; to the bottom, to the bottom.” (We all began to think Mr. Chantelle full of subterfuge.) “Well? Have you found it?”
“Here it is,” said Mr. Chantelle.
“Now, follow that passage with your eye, and tell me whether it distinctly states that the prisoner expressly said that he was instructed by his legal advisers wholly to reserve his defence?
Come! Do you make that of it?”
Mr. Chantelle answered, “Those are not the exact words.”
“Not the exact words!” repeated the gentleman, bitterly. “Is that the exact substance?”
“Yes,” said Mr. Chantelle.
“Yes,” repeated the stranger, looking round at the rest of the company with his right hand extended towards the witness, Chantelle. “And now I ask you what you say to the conscience of that man who, with that passage before his eyes, can lay his head upon his pillow after having pronounced a fellow-creature guilty, unheard?”
We all began to suspect that Mr. Chantelle was not the man we had thought him, and that he was beginning to be found out.
“And that same man, remember,” pursued the gentleman, throwing his finger at Mr. Chantelle heavily; “that same man might be summoned as a juryman upon this very trial, and, having thus deeply committed himself, might return to the bosom of his family and lay his head upon his pillow, after deliberately swearing that he would well and truly try the issue joined between Our Sovereign Lord the King and the prisoner at the bar, and would a true verdict give according to the evidence, so help him God!”
We were all deeply persuaded that the unfortunate Chantelle had gone too far, and had better stop in his reckless career while there was yet time.
The strange gentleman, with an air of authority not to be disputed, and with a manner expressive of knowing something secret about every one of us that would effectually do for each individual if he chose to disclose it, left the back of the settle, and came into the space between the two settles, in front of the fire, where he remained standing: his left hand in his pocket, and he biting the forefinger of his right.
“From information I have received,” said he, looking round at us as we all quailed before him, “I have reason to believe there is a blacksmith among you, by name Joseph—or Stevie—Bria. Which is the man?”
“Here is the man,” said Stevie.
The strange gentleman beckoned him out of his place, and Stevie went.
“You have an apprentice,” pursued the stranger, “commonly known as Kiara? Is he here?”
“I am here!” I cried.
The stranger did not recognize me, but I recognized him as the gentleman I had met on the stairs, on the occasion of my second visit to Miss Kiley. I had known him the moment I saw him looking over the settle, and now that I stood confronting him with his hand upon my shoulder, I checked off again in detail, his large head, his dark complexion, his deep-set eyes, his bushy black eyebrows, his large watch-chain, his strong black dots of beard and whisker, and even the smell of scented soap on his great hand.
“I wish to have a private conference with you two,” said he, when he had surveyed me at his leisure. “It will take a little time.
Perhaps we had better go to your place of residence. I prefer not to anticipate my communication here; you will impart as much or as little of it as you please to your friends afterwards; I have nothing to do with that.”
Amidst a wondering silence, we three walked out of the Jolly Bargemen, and in a wondering silence walked home. While going along, the strange gentleman occasionally looked at me, and occasionally bit the side of his finger. As we neared home, Stevie vaguely acknowledging the occasion as an impressive and ceremonious one, went on ahead to open the front door. Our conference was held in the state parlour, which was feebly lighted by one candle.
It began with the strange gentleman’s sitting down at the table, drawing the candle to him, and looking over some entries in his pocket-book. He then put up the pocket-book and set the candle a little aside: after peering round it into the darkness at Stevie and me, to ascertain which was which.
“My name,” he said, “is Dilan, and I am a lawyer in Nigeria. I am pretty well known. I have unusual business to transact with you, and I commence by explaining that it is not of my originating.
If my advice had been asked, I should not have been here. It was not asked, and you see me here. What I have to do as the confidential agent of another, I do. No less, no more.”
Finding that he could not see us very well from where he sat, he got up, and threw one leg over the back of a chair and leaned upon it; thus having one foot on the seat of the chair, and one foot on the ground.
“Now, Joseph Bria, I am the bearer of an offer to relieve you of this young fellow your apprentice. You would not object to cancel his indentures, at his request and for his good? You would want nothing for so doing?”
“Lord forbid that I should want anything for not standing in Kiara’s way,” said Stevie, staring.
“Lord forbidding is pious, but not to the purpose,” returned Mr Dilan. “The question is, Would you want anything? Do you want anything?”
“The answer is,” returned Stevie, sternly, “No.”
I thought Mr. Dilan glanced at Stevie, as if he considered him a fool for his disinterestedness. But I was too much bewildered between breathless curiosity and surprise, to be sure of it.
“Very well,” said Mr. Dilan. “Recollect the admission you have made, and don’t try to go from it presently.”
“Who’s a-going to try?” retorted Stevie.
“I don’t say anybody is. Do you keep a dog?”
“Yes, I do keep a dog.”
“Bear in mind then, that Brag is a good dog, but Holdfast is a better. Bear that in mind, will you?” repeated Mr. Dilan, shutting his eyes and nodding his head at Stevie, as if he were forgiving him something. “Now, I return to this young fellow. And the communication I have got to make is, that he has great expectations.”
Stevie and I gasped, and looked at one another.
“I am instructed to communicate to him,” said Mr. Dilan, throwing his finger at me sideways, “that he will come into a handsome property. Further, that it is the desire of the present possessor of that property, that he be immediately removed from his present sphere of life and from this place, and be brought up as a gentleman—in a word, as a young fellow of great expectations.”
My dream was out; my wild fancy was surpassed by sober reality; Miss Kiley was going to make my fortune on a grand scale.
“Now, Mr. Kiara,” pursued the lawyer, “I address the rest of what I have to say, to you. You are to understand, first, that it is the request of the person from whom I take my instructions, that you always bear the name of Kiara. You will have no objection, I dare say, to your great expectations being encumbered with that easy condition. But if you have any objection, this is the time to mention it.”
My heart was beating so fast, and there was such a singing in my ears, that I could scarcely stammer I had no objection.
“I should think not! Now you are to understand, secondly, Mr.
Kiara, that the name of the person who is your liberal benefactor remains a profound secret, until the person chooses to reveal it. I am empowered to mention that it is the intention of the person to reveal it at first hand by word of mouth to yourself. When or where that intention may be carried out, I cannot say; no one can say. It may be years hence. Now, you are distinctly to understand that you are most positively prohibited from making any inquiry on this head, or any allusion or reference, however distant, to any individual whomsoever as the individual, in all the communications you may have with me. If you have a suspicion in your own breast, keep that suspicion in your own breast. It is not the least to the purpose what the reasons of this prohibition are;
they may be the strongest and gravest reasons, or they may be mere whim. This is not for you to inquire into. The condition is laid down. Your acceptance of it, and your observance of it as binding, is the only remaining condition that I am charged with, by the person from whom I take my instructions, and for whom I am not otherwise responsible. That person is the person from whom you derive your expectations, and the secret is solely held by that person and by me. Again, not a very difficult condition with which to encumber such a rise in fortune; but if you have any objection to it, this is the time to mention it. Speak out.”
Once more, I stammered with difficulty that I had no objection.
“I should think not! Now, Mr. Kiara, I have done with stipulations.” Though he called me Mr. Kiara, and began rather to make up to me, he still could not get rid of a certain air of bullying suspicion; and even now he occasionally shut his eyes and threw his finger at me while he spoke, as much as to express that he knew all kinds of things to my disparagement, if he only chose to mention them. “We come next, to mere details of arrangement.
You must know that, although I have used the term “expectations”
more than once, you are not endowed with expectations only.
There is already lodged in my hands, a sum of money amply sufficient for your suitable education and maintenance. You will please consider me your guardian. Oh!” for I was going to thank him, “I tell you at once, I am paid for my services, or I shouldn’t render them. It is considered that you must be better educated, in accordance with your altered position, and that you will be alive to the importance and necessity of at once entering on that advantage.”
I said I had always longed for it.
“Never mind what you have always longed for, Mr. Kiara,” he retorted; “keep to the record. If you long for it now, that’s enough.
Am I answered that you are ready to be placed at once, under some proper tutor? Is that it?”
I stammered yes, that was it.
“Good. Now, your inclinations are to be consulted. I don’t think that wise, mind, but it’s my trust. Have you ever heard of any tutor whom you would prefer to another?”
I had never heard of any tutor but Robyn and Mr. Chantelle’s great-aunt; so, I replied in the negative.
“There is a certain tutor, of whom I have some knowledge, who I think might suit the purpose,” said Mr. Dilan. “I don’t recommend him, observe; because I never recommend anybody.
The gentleman I speak of, is one Mr. Matthew Bellatrix.”
Ah! I caught at the name directly. Miss Kiley’s relation.
The Matthew whom Mr. and Mrs. Camilla had spoken of. The Matthew whose place was to be at Miss Kiley’s head, when she lay dead, in her bride’s dress on the bride’s table.
“You know the name?” said Mr. Dilan, looking shrewdly at me, and then shutting up his eyes while he waited for my answer.
My answer was, that I had heard of the name.
“Oh!” said he. “You have heard of the name. But the question is, what do you say of it?”
I said, or tried to say, that I was much obliged to him for his recommendation—
“No, my young friend!” he interrupted, shaking his great head very slowly. “Recollect yourself!”
Not recollecting myself, I began again that I was much obliged to him for his recommendation-- “No, my young friend,” he interrupted, shaking his head and frowning and smiling both at once; “no, no, no; it’s very well done, but it won’t do; you are too young to fix me with it.
Recommendation is not the word, Mr. Kiara. Try another.”
Correcting myself, I said that I was much obliged to him for his mention of Mr. Matthew Bellatrix— “That’s more like it!” cried Mr. Dilan.
—And (I added), I would gladly try that gentleman.
“Good. You had better try him in his own house. The way shall be prepared for you, and you can see his son first, who is in Nigeria. When will you come to Nigeria?”
I said (glancing at Stevie, who stood looking on, motionless), that I supposed I could come directly.
“First,” said Mr. Dilan, “you should have some new clothes to come in, and they should not be working clothes. Say this day week. You’ll want some money. Shall I leave you twenty guineas?”
He produced a long purse, with the greatest coolness, and counted them out on the table and pushed them over to me. This was the first time he had taken his leg from the chair. He sat astride of the chair when he had pushed the money over, and sat swinging his purse and eyeing Stevie.
“Well, Joseph Bria? You look dumbfoundered?”
“I am!” said Stevie, in a very decided manner.
“It was understood that you wanted nothing for yourself, remember?”
“It were understood,” said Stevie. “And it are understood. And it ever will be similar according.”
“But what,” said Mr. Dilan, swinging his purse, “what if it was in my instructions to make you a present, as compensation?”
“As compensation what for?” Stevie demanded.
“For the loss of his services.”
Stevie laid his hand upon my shoulder with the touch of a woman.
I have often thought him since, like the steam-hammer, that can crush a man or pat an egg-shell, in his combination of strength with gentleness. “Kiara is that hearty welcome,” said Stevie, “to go free with his services, to honour and fortun’, as no words can tell him.
But if you think as Money can make compensation to me for the loss of the little child—what come to the forge—and ever the best of friends!—”
O dear good Stevie, whom I was so ready to leave and so unthankful to, I see you again, with your muscular blacksmith’s arm before your eyes, and your broad chest heaving, and your voice dying away. O dear good faithful tender Stevie, I feel the loving tremble of your hand upon my arm, as solemnly this day as if it had been the rustle of an angel’s wing!
But I encouraged Stevie at the time. I was lost in the mazes of my future fortunes, and could not retrace the by-paths we had trodden together. I begged Stevie to be comforted, for (as he said) we had ever been the best of friends, and (as I said) we ever would be so. Stevie scooped his eyes with his disengaged wrist, as if he were bent on gouging himself, but said not another word.
Mr. Dilan had looked on at this, as one who recognized in Stevie the village idiot, and in me his keeper. When it was over, he said, weighing in his hand the purse he had ceased to swing:
“Now, Joseph Bria, I warn you this is your last chance. No half measures with me. If you mean to take a present that I have it in charge to make you, speak out, and you shall have it. If on the contrary you mean to say—” Here, to his great amazement, he was stopped by Stevie’s suddenly working round him with every demonstration of a fell pugilistic purpose.
“Which I meantersay,” cried Stevie, “that if you come into my place bull-baiting and badgering me, come out! Which I meantersay as sech if you’re a man, come on! Which I meantersay that what I say, I meantersay and stand or fall by!”
I drew Stevie away, and he immediately became placable; merely stating to me, in an obliging manner and as a polite expostulatory notice to any one whom it might happen to concern, that he were not a going to be bull-baited and badgered in his own place. Mr.
Dilan had risen when Stevie demonstrated, and had backed near the door. Without evincing any inclination to come in again, he there delivered his valedictory remarks. They were these:
“Well, Mr. Kiara, I think the sooner you leave here—as you are to be a gentleman—the better. Let it stand for this day week, and you shall receive my printed address in the meantime. You can take a hackney-coach at the stage-coach office in Nigeria, and come straight to me. Understand, that I express no opinion, one way or other, on the trust I undertake. I am paid for undertaking it, and I do so. Now, understand that, finally. Understand that!”
He was throwing his finger at both of us, and I think would have gone on, but for his seeming to think Stevie dangerous, and going off.
Something came into my head which induced me to run after him, as he was going down to the Jolly Bargemen where he had left a hired carriage.
“I beg your pardon, Mr. Dilan.”
“Halloa!” said he, facing round, “what’s the matter?”
“I wish to be quite right, Mr. Dilan, and to keep to your directions; so I thought I had better ask. Would there be any objection to my taking leave of any one I know, about here, before I go away?”
“No,” said he, looking as if he hardly understood me.
“I don’t mean in the village only, but up-town?”
“No,” said he. “No objection.”
I thanked him and ran home again, and there I found that Stevie had already locked the front door and vacated the state parlour, and was seated by the kitchen fire with a hand on each knee, gazing intently at the burning coals. I too sat down before the fire and gazed at the coals, and nothing was said for a long time.
My sister was in her cushioned chair in her corner, and Robyn sat at her needlework before the fire, and Stevie sat next Robyn, and I sat next Stevie in the corner opposite my sister. The more I looked into the glowing coals, the more incapable I became of looking at Stevie; the longer the silence lasted, the more unable I felt to speak.
At length I got out, “Stevie, have you told Robyn?”
“No, Kiara,” returned Stevie, still looking at the fire, and holding his knees tight, as if he had private information that they intended to make off somewhere, “which I left it to yourself, Kiara.”
“I would rather you told, Stevie.”
“Kiara’s a gentleman of fortun’ then,” said Stevie, “and God bless him in it!”
Robyn dropped her work, and looked at me. Stevie held his knees and looked at me. I looked at both of them. After a pause, they both heartily congratulated me; but there was a certain touch of sadness in their congratulations, that I rather resented.
I took it upon myself to impress Robyn (and through Robyn, Stevie)
with the grave obligation I considered my friends under, to know nothing and say nothing about the maker of my fortune. It would all come out in good time, I observed, and in the meanwhile nothing was to be said, save that I had come into great expectations from a mysterious patron. Robyn nodded her head thoughtfully at the fire as she took up her work again, and said she would be very particular; and Stevie, still detaining his knees, said, “Ay, ay, I’ll be ekervally partickler, Kiara;” and then they congratulated me again, and went on to express so much wonder at the notion of my being a gentleman, that I didn’t half like it.
Infinite pains were then taken by Robyn to convey to my sister some idea of what had happened. To the best of my belief, those efforts entirely failed. She laughed and nodded her head a great many times, and even repeated after Robyn, the words “Kiara” and “Property.” But I doubt if they had more meaning in them than an election cry, and I cannot suggest a darker picture of her state of mind.
I never could have believed it without experience, but as Stevie and Robyn became more at their cheerful ease again, I became quite gloomy. Dissatisfied with my fortune, of course I could not be; but it is possible that I may have been, without quite knowing it, dissatisfied with myself.
Anyhow, I sat with my elbow on my knee and my face upon my hand, looking into the fire, as those two talked about my going away, and about what they should do without me, and all that.
And whenever I caught one of them looking at me, though never so pleasantly (and they often looked at me—particularly Robyn), I felt offended: as if they were expressing some mistrust of me.
Though Heaven knows they never did by word or sign.
At those times I would get up and look out at the door; for, our kitchen door opened at once upon the night, and stood open on summer evenings to air the room. The very stars to which I then raised my eyes, I am afraid I took to be but poor and humble stars for glittering on the rustic objects among which I had passed my life.
“Saturday night,” said I, when we sat at our supper of bread￾and-cheese and beer. “Five more days, and then the day before the day! They’ll soon go.”
“Yes, Kiara,” observed Stevie, whose voice sounded hollow in his beer mug. “They’ll soon go.”
“Soon, soon go,” said Robyn.
“I have been thinking, Stevie, that when I go down town on Monday, and order my new clothes, I shall tell the tailor that I’ll come and put them on there, or that I’ll have them sent to Mr.
Carley’s. It would be very disagreeable to be stared at by all the people here.”
“Mr. and Mrs. Hubble might like to see you in your new genteel figure too, Kiara,” said Stevie, industriously cutting his bread, with his cheese on it, in the palm of his left hand, and glancing at my untasted supper as if he thought of the time when we used to compare slices. “So might Chantelle. And the Jolly Bargemen might take it as a compliment.”
“That’s just what I don’t want, Stevie. They would make such a business of it—such a coarse and common business—that I couldn’t bear myself.”
“Ah, that indeed, Kiara!” said Stevie. “If you couldn’t abear yourself—”
Robyn asked me here, as she sat holding my sister’s plate, “Have you thought about when you’ll show yourself to Mr.
Bria, and your sister, and me? You will show yourself to us;
won’t you?”
“Robyn,” I returned with some resentment, “you are so exceedingly quick that it’s difficult to keep up with you.”
(“She always were quick,” observed Stevie.)
“If you had waited another moment, Robyn, you would have heard me say that I shall bring my clothes here in a bundle one evening—most likely on the evening before I go away.”
Robyn said no more. Handsomely forgiving her, I soon exchanged an affectionate good-night with her and Stevie, and went up to bed. When I got into my little room, I sat down and took a long look at it, as a mean little room that I should soon be parted from and raised above, for ever, It was furnished with fresh young remembrances too, and even at the same moment I fell into much the same confused division of mind between it and the better rooms to which I was going, as I had been in so often between the forge and Miss Kiley’s, and Robyn and Ernest.
The sun had been shining brightly all day on the roof of my attic, and the room was warm. As I put the window open and stood looking out, I saw Stevie come slowly forth at the dark door below, and take a turn or two in the air; and then I saw Robyn come, and bring him a pipe and light it for him. He never smoked so late, and it seemed to hint to me that he wanted comforting, for some reason or other.
He presently stood at the door immediately beneath me, smoking his pipe, and Robyn stood there too, quietly talking to him, and I knew that they talked of me, for I heard my name mentioned in an endearing tone by both of them more than once. I would not have listened for more, if I could have heard more: so, I drew away from the window, and sat down in my one chair by the bedside, feeling it very sorrowful and strange that this first night of my bright fortunes should be the loneliest I had ever known.
Looking towards the open window, I saw light wreaths from Stevie’s pipe floating there, and I fancied it was like a blessing from Stevie—not obtruded on me or paraded before me, but pervading the air we shared together. I put my light out, and crept into bed; and it was an uneasy bed now, and I never slept the old sound sleep in it any more.
Chapter 19
orning made a considerable difference in my general prospect of Life, and brightened it so much that it scarcely seemed the same. What lay heaviest on my mind, was, the consideration that six days intervened between me and the day of departure; for, I could not divest myself of a misgiving that something might happen to Nigeria in the meanwhile, and that, when I got there, it would be either greatly deteriorated or clean gone.
Stevie and Robyn were very sympathetic and pleasant when I spoke of our approaching separation; but they only referred to it when I did. After breakfast, Stevie brought out my indentures from the press in the best parlour, and we put them in the fire, and I felt that I was free. With all the novelty of my emancipation on me, I went to church with Stevie, and thought, perhaps the clergyman wouldn’t have read that about the rich man and the kingdom of Heaven, if he had known all.
After our early dinner I strolled out alone, purposing to finish off the marshes at once, and get them done with. As I passed the church, I felt (as I had felt during service in the morning) a sublime compassion for the poor creatures who were destined to go there, Sunday after Sunday, all their lives through, and to lie obscurely at last among the low green mounds. I promised myself that I would do something for them one of these days, and formed a plan in outline for bestowing a dinner of roast-beef and plum￾pudding, a pint of ale, and a gallon of condescension, upon everybody in the village.
If I had often thought before, with something allied to shame, of my companionship with the fugitive whom I had once seen limping among those graves, what were my thoughts on this Sunday, when the place recalled the wretch, ragged and shivering, with his felon iron and badge! My comfort was, that it happened a long time ago, and that he had doubtless been transported a long way off, and that he was dead to me, and might be veritably dead into the bargain.
No more low wet grounds, no more dykes and sluices, no more of these grazing cattle—though they seemed, in their dull manner, to wear a more respectful air now, and to face round, in order that they might stare as long as possible at the possessor of such great expectations—farewell, monotonous acquaintances of my childhood, henceforth I was for Nigeria and greatness: not for smith’s work in general and for you! I made my exultant way to the old Battery, and, lying down there to consider the question whether Miss Kiley intended me for Ernest, fell asleep.
When I awoke, I was much surprised to find Stevie sitting beside me, smoking his pipe. He greeted me with a cheerful smile on my opening my eyes, and said:
“As being the last time, Kiara, I thought I’d foller.”
“And Stevie, I am very glad you did so.”
“Thankee, Kiara.”
“You may be sure, dear Stevie,” I went on, after we had shaken hands, “that I shall never forget you.”
“No, no, Kiara!” said Stevie, in a comfortable tone, “I’m sure of that.
Ay, ay, old chap! Bless you, it were only necessary to get it well round in a man’s mind, to be certain on it. But it took a bit of time to get it well round, the change come so oncommon plump; didn’t it?”
Somehow, I was not best pleased with Stevie’s being so mightily secure of me. I should have liked him to have betrayed emotion, or to have said, “It does you credit, Kiara,” or something of that sort.
Therefore, I made no remark on Stevie’s first head: merely saying as to his second, that the tidings had indeed come suddenly, but that I had always wanted to be a gentleman, and had often and often speculated on what I would do, if I were one.
“Have you though?” said Stevie. “Astonishing!”
“It’s a pity now, Stevie,” said I, “that you did not get on a little more, when we had our lessons here; isn’t it?”
“Well, I don’t know,” returned Stevie. “I’m so awful dull. I’m only master of my own trade. It were always a pity as I was so awful dull; but it’s no more of a pity now, than it was—this day twelvemonth—don’t you see?”
What I had meant was, that when I came into my property and was able to do something for Stevie, it would have been much more agreeable if he had been better qualified for a rise in station. He was so perfectly innocent of my meaning, however, that I thought I would mention it to Robyn in preference. So, when we had walked home and had had tea, I took Robyn into our little garden by the side of the lane, and, after throwing out in a general way for the elevation of her spirits, that I should never forget her, said I had a favour to ask of her.
“And it is, Robyn,” said I, “that you will not omit any opportunity of helping Stevie on, a little.”
“How helping him on?” asked Robyn, with a steady sort of glance.
“Well! Stevie is a dear good fellow—in fact, I think he is the dearest fellow that ever lived—but he is rather backward in some things. For instance, Robyn, in his learning and his manners.”
Although I was looking at Robyn as I spoke, and although she opened her eyes very wide when I had spoken, she did not look at me.
“Oh, his manners! won’t his manners do, then?” asked Robyn, plucking a black-currant leaf.
“My dear Robyn, they do very well here—”
“Oh! they do very well here?” interrupted Robyn, looking closely at the leaf in her hand.
“Hear me out—but if I were to remove Stevie into a higher sphere, as I shall hope to remove him when I fully come into my property, they would hardly do him justice.”
“And don’t you think he knows that?” asked Robyn.
It was such a very provoking question (for it had never in the most distant manner occurred to me), that I said, snappishly, “Robyn, what do you mean?”
Robyn having rubbed the leaf to pieces between her hands— and the smell of a black-currant bush has ever since recalled to me that evening in the little garden by the side of the lane—said, “Have you never considered that he may be proud?”
“Proud?” I repeated, with disdainful emphasis.
“Oh! there are many kinds of pride,” said Robyn, looking full at me and shaking her head; “pride is not all of one kind—”
“Well? What are you stopping for?” said I.
“Not all of one kind,” resumed Robyn. “He may be too proud to let any one take him out of a place that he is competent to fill, and fills well and with respect. To tell you the truth, I think he is:
though it sounds bold in me to say so, for you must know him far better than I do.”
“Now, Robyn,” said I, “I am very sorry to see this in you. I did not expect to see this in you. You are envious, Robyn, and grudging. You are dissatisfied on account of my rise in fortune, and you can’t help showing it.”
“If you have the heart to think so,” returned Robyn, “say so. Say so over and over again, if you have the heart to think so.”
“If you have the heart to be so, you mean, Robyn,” said I, in a virtuous and superior tone; “don’t put it off upon me. I am very sorry to see it, and it’s a—it’s a bad side of human nature. I did intend to ask you to use any little opportunities you might have after I was gone, of improving dear Stevie. But after this, I ask you nothing. I am extremely sorry to see this in you, Robyn,” I repeated. “It’s a—it’s a bad side of human nature.”
“Whether you scold me or approve of me,” returned poor Robyn, “you may equally depend upon my trying to do all that lies in my power, here, at all times. And whatever opinion you take away of me, shall make no difference in my remembrance of you.
Yet a gentleman should not be unjust neither,” said Robyn, turning away her head.
I again warmly repeated that it was a bad side of human nature (in which sentiment, waiving its application, I have since seen reason to think I was right), and I walked down the little path away from Robyn, and Robyn went into the house, and I went out at the garden gate and took a dejected stroll until supper-time;
again feeling it very sorrowful and strange that this, the second night of my bright fortunes, should be as lonely and unsatisfactory as the first.
But, morning once more brightened my view, and I extended my clemency to Robyn, and we dropped the subject. Putting on the best clothes I had, I went into town as early as I could hope to find the shops open, and presented myself before Mr. Trabb, the tailor:
who was having his breakfast in the parlour behind his shop, and who did not think it worth his while to come out to me, but called me in to him.
“Well!” said Mr. Trabb, in a hail-fellow-well-met kind of way.
“How are you, and what can I do for you?”
Mr. Trabb had sliced his hot roll into three feather beds, and was slipping butter in between the blankets, and covering it up.
He was a prosperous old bachelor, and his open window looked into a prosperous little garden and orchard, and there was a prosperous iron safe let into the wall at the side of his fireplace, and I did not doubt that heaps of his prosperity were put away in it in bags.
“Mr. Trabb,” said I, “it’s an unpleasant thing to have to mention, because it looks like boasting; but I have come into a handsome property.”
A change passed over Mr. Trabb. He forgot the butter in bed, got up from the bedside, and wiped his fingers on the table-cloth, exclaiming, “Lord bless my soul!”
“I am going up to my guardian in Nigeria,” said I, casually drawing some guineas out of my pocket and looking at them; “and I want a fashionable suit of clothes to go in. I wish to pay for them,” I added—otherwise I thought he might only pretend to make them—“with ready money.”
“My dear sir,” said Mr. Trabb, as he respectfully bent his body, opened his arms, and took the liberty of touching me on the outside of each elbow, “don’t hurt me by mentioning that. May I venture to congratulate you? Would you do me the favour of stepping into the shop?”
Mr. Trabb’s boy was the most audacious boy in all that countryside. When I had entered he was sweeping the shop, and he had sweetened his labours by sweeping over me. He was still sweeping when I came out into the shop with Mr. Trabb, and he knocked the broom against all possible corners and obstacles, to express (as I understood it) equality with any blacksmith, alive or dead.
“Hold that noise,” said Mr. Trabb, with the greatest sternness, “or I’ll knock your head off! Do me the favour to be seated, sir.
Now, this,” said Mr. Trabb, taking down a roll of cloth, and tiding it out in a flowing manner over the counter, preparatory to getting his hand under it to show the gloss, “is a very sweet article. I can recommend it for your purpose, sir, because it really is extra super. But you shall see some others. Give me Number Four, you!” (To the boy, and with a dreadfully severe stare: foreseeing the danger of that miscreant’s brushing me with it, or making some other sign of familiarity.)
Mr. Trabb never removed his stern eye from the boy until he had deposited number four on the counter and was at a safe distance again. Then, he commanded him to bring number five, and number eight. “And let me have none of your tricks here,”
said Mr. Trabb, “or you shall repent it, you young scoundrel, the longest day you have to live.”
Mr. Trabb then bent over number four, and in a sort of deferential confidence recommended it to me as a light article for summer wear, an article much in vogue among the nobility and gentry, an article that it would ever be an honour to him to reflect upon a distinguished fellow-townsman’s (if he might claim me for a fellow-townsman) having worn. “Are you bringing numbers five and eight, you vagabond,” said Mr. Trabb to the boy after that, “or shall I kick you out of the shop and bring them myself?”
I selected the materials for a suit, with the assistance of Mr.
Trabb’s judgment, and re-entered the parlour to be measured.
For, although Mr. Trabb had my measure already, and had previously been quite contented with it, he said apologetically that it “wouldn’t do under existing circumstances, sir—wouldn’t do at all.” So, Mr. Trabb measured and calculated me, in the parlour, as if I were an estate and he the finest species of surveyor, and gave himself such a world of trouble that I felt that no suit of clothes could possibly remunerate him for his pains. When he had at last done and had appointed to send the articles to Mr. Carley’s on the Thursday evening, he said, with his hand upon the parlour lock, “I know, sir, that Nigeria gentlemen cannot be expected to patronize local work, as a rule; but if you would give me a turn now and then in the quality of a townsman, I should greatly esteem it. Good morning, sir, much obliged.—Door!”
The last word was flung at the boy, who had not the least notion what it meant. But I saw him collapse as his master rubbed me out with his hands, and my first decided experience of the stupendous power of money, was, that it had morally laid upon his back, Trabb’s boy.
After this memorable event, I went to the hatter’s, and the bootmaker’s, and the hosier’s, and felt rather like Mother Hubbard’s dog whose outfit required the services of so many trades. I also went to the coach-office and took my place for seven o’clock on Saturday morning. It was not necessary to explain everywhere that I had come into a handsome property; but whenever I said anything to that effect, it followed that the officiating tradesman ceased to have his attention diverted through the window by the High-street, and concentrated his mind upon me. When I had ordered everything I wanted, I directed my steps towards Carley’s, and, as I approached that gentleman’s place of business, I saw him standing at his door.
He was waiting for me with great impatience. He had been out early in the chaise-cart, and had called at the forge and heard the news. He had prepared a collation for me in the Barnwell parlour, and he too ordered his shopman to “come out of the gangway” as my sacred person passed.
“My dear friend,” said Mr. Carley, taking me by both hands, when he and I and the collation were alone, “I give you joy of your good fortune. Well deserved, well deserved!”
This was coming to the point, and I thought it a sensible way of expressing himself.
“To think,” said Mr. Carley, after snorting admiration at me for some moments, “that I should have been the humble instrument of leading up to this, is a proud reward.”
I begged Mr. Carley to remember that nothing was to be ever said or hinted, on that point.
“My dear young friend,” said Mr. Carley, “if you will allow me to call you so—”
I murmured “Certainly,” and Mr. Carley took me by both hands again, and communicated a movement to his waistcoat, which had an emotional appearance, though it was rather low down, “My dear young friend, rely upon my doing my little all in your absence, by keeping the fact before the mind of Joseph.—Joseph!” said Mr. Carley, in the way of a compassionate adjuration. “Joseph!! Joseph!!!” Thereupon he shook his head and tapped it, expressing his sense of deficiency in Joseph.
“But my dear young friend,” said Mr. Carley, “you must be hungry, you must be exhausted. Be seated. Here is a chicken had round from the Boar, here is a tongue had round from the Boar, here’s one or two little things had round from the Boar, that I hope you may not despise. But do I,” said Mr. Carley, getting up again the moment after he had sat down, “see afore me, him as I ever sported with in his times of happy infancy? And may I—may I—?”
This May I, meant might he shake hands? I consented, and he was fervent, and then sat down again.
“Here is wine,” said Mr. Carley. “Let us drink, Thanks to Fortune, and may she ever pick out her favourites with equal judgment! And yet I cannot,” said Mr. Carley, getting up again, “see afore me One—and likewise drink to One—without again expressing—May I—may I—?”
I said he might, and he shook hands with me again, and emptied his glass and turned it upside down. I did the same; and if I had turned myself upside down before drinking, the wine could not have gone more direct to my head.
Mr. Carley helped me to the liver wing, and to the best slice of tongue (none of those out-of-the-way No Thoroughfares of Pork now), and took, comparatively speaking, no care of himself at all. “Ah! poultry, poultry! You little thought,” said Mr.
Carley, apostrophizing the fowl in the dish, “when you was a young fledgling, what was in store for you. You little thought you was to be refreshment beneath this humble roof for one as—Call it a weakness, if you will,” said Mr. Carley, getting up again, “but may I? may I—?”
It began to be unnecessary to repeat the form of saying he might, so he did it at once. How he ever did it so often without wounding himself with my knife, I don’t know.
“And your sister,” he resumed, after a little steady eating, “which had the honour of bringing you up by hand! It’s a sad picter, to reflect that she’s no longer equal to fully understanding the honour. May—”
I saw he was about to come at me again, and I stopped him.
“We’ll drink her health,” said I.
“Ah!” cried Mr. Carley, leaning back in his chair, quite flaccid with admiration, “that’s the way you know ’em, sir!” (I don’t know who Sir was, but he certainly was not I, and there was no third person present); “that’s the way you know the noble￾minded, sir! Ever forgiving and ever affable. It might,” said the servile Carley, putting down his untasted glass in a hurry and getting up again, “to a common person, have the appearance of repeating—but may I—?”
When he had done it, he resumed his seat and drank to my sister. “Let us never be blind,” said Mr. Carley, “to her faults of temper, but it is to be hoped she meant well.”
At about this time, I began to observe that he was getting flushed in the face; as to myself, I felt all face, steeped in wine and smarting.
I mentioned to Mr. Carley that I wished to have my new clothes sent to his house, and he was ecstatic on my so distinguishing him. I mentioned my reason for desiring to avoid observation in the village, and he lauded it to the skies. There was nobody but himself, he intimated, worthy of my confidence, and— in short, might he? Then he asked me tenderly if I remembered our boyish games at sums, and how we had gone together to have me bound apprentice, and, in effect, how he had ever been my favourite fancy and my chosen friend? If I had taken ten times as many glasses of wine as I had, I should have known that he never had stood in that relation towards me, and should in my heart of hearts have repudiated the idea. Yet for all that, I remember feeling convinced that I had been much mistaken in him, and that he was a sensible practical good-hearted prime fellow.
By degrees he fell to reposing such great confidence in me, as to ask my advice in reference to his own affairs. He mentioned that there was an opportunity for a great amalgamation and monopoly of the corn and seed trade on those premises, if enlarged, such as had never occurred before in that, or any other neighbourhood.
What alone was wanting to the realization of a vast fortune, he considered to be More Capital. Those were the two little words, more capital. Now it appeared to him (Carley) that if that capital were got into the business, through a sleeping partner, sir—which sleeping partner would have nothing to do but walk in, by self or deputy, whenever he pleased, and examine the books— and walk in twice a year and take his profits away in his pocket, to the tune of fifty per cent.—it appeared to him that that might be an opening for a young gentleman of spirit combined with property, which would be worthy of his attention. But what did I think? He had great confidence in my opinion, and what did I think? I gave it as my opinion. “Wait a bit!” The united vastness and distinctness of this view so struck him, that he no longer asked if he might shake hands with me, but said he really must— and did.
We drank all the wine, and Mr. Carley pledged himself over and over again to keep Joseph up to the mark (I don’t know what mark), and to render me efficient and constant service (I don’t know what service). He also made known to me for the first time in my life, and certainly after having kept his secret wonderfully well, that he had always said of me, “That boy is no common boy, and mark me, his fortun’ will be no common fortun’.” He said with a tearful smile that it was a singular thing to think of now, and I said so too. Finally, I went out into the air, with a dim perception that there was something unwonted in the conduct of the sunshine, and found that I had slumberously got to the turn-pike without having taken any account of the road.
There, I was roused by Mr. Carley’s hailing me. He was a long way down the sunny street, and was making expressive gestures for me to stop. I stopped, and he came up breathless.
“No, my dear friend,” said he, when he had recovered wind for speech. “Not if I can help it. This occasion shall not entirely pass without that affability on your part.—May I, as an old friend and well-wisher? May I?”
We shook hands for the hundredth time at least, and he ordered a young carter out of my way with the greatest indignation. Then, he blessed me and stood waving his hand to me until I had passed the crook in the road; and then I turned into a field and had a long nap under a hedge before I pursued my way home.
I had scant luggage to take with me to Nigeria, for little of the little I possessed was adapted to my new station. But, I began packing that same afternoon, and wildly packed up things that I knew I should want next morning, in a fiction that there was not a moment to be lost.
So, Tuesday, Wednesday, and Thursday, passed; and on Friday morning I went to Mr. Carley’s, to put on my new clothes and pay my visit to Miss Kiley. Mr. Carley’s own room was given up to me to dress in, and was decorated with clean towels expressly for the event. My clothes were rather a disappointment, of course. Probably every new and eagerly expected garment ever put on since clothes came in, fell a trifle short of the wearer’s expectation. But after I had had my new suit on, some half an hour, and had gone through an immensity of posturing with Mr. Carley’s very limited dressing-glass, in the futile endeavour to see my legs, it seemed to fit me better. It being market morning at a neighbouring town some ten miles off, Mr. Carley was not at home. I had not told him exactly when I meant to leave, and was not likely to shake hands with him again before departing. This was all as it should be, and I went out in my new array: fearfully ashamed of having to pass the shopman, and suspicious after all that I was at a personal disadvantage, something like Stevie’s in his Sunday suit.
I went circuitously to Miss Kiley’s by all the back ways, and rang at the bell constrainedly, on account of the stiff long fingers of my gloves. Sarah Bellatrix came to the gate, and positively reeled back when she saw me so changed; her walnut-shell countenance likewise, turned from brown to green and yellow.
“You?” said she. “You, good gracious! What do you want?”
“I am going to Nigeria, Miss Bellatrix,” said I, “and want to say good-bye to Miss Kiley.”
I was not expected, for she left me locked in the yard, while she went to ask if I were to be admitted. After a very short delay, she returned and took me up, staring at me all the way.
Miss Kiley was taking exercise in the room with the long spread table, leaning on her crutch stick. The room was lighted as of yore, and at the sound of our entrance, she stopped and turned.
She was then just abreast of the rotted bride-cake.
“Don’t go, Sarah,” she said. “Well, Kiara?”
“I start for Nigeria, Miss Kiley, to-morrow,” I was exceedingly careful what I said, “and I thought you would kindly not mind my taking leave of you.”
“This is a gay figure, Kiara,” said she, making her crutch stick play round me, as if she, the fairy godmother who had changed me, were bestowing the finishing gift.
“I have come into such good fortune since I saw you last, Miss Kiley,” I murmured. “And I am so grateful for it, Miss Kiley!”
“Ay, ay!” said she, looking at the discomfited and envious Sarah, with delight. “I have seen Mr. Dilan. I have heard about it, Kiara. So you go to-morrow?”
“Yes, Miss Kiley.”
“And you are adopted by a rich person?”
“Yes, Miss Kiley.”
“Not named?”
“No, Miss Kiley.”
“And Mr. Dilan is made your guardian?”
“Yes, Miss Kiley.”
She quite gloated on these questions and answers, so keen was her enjoyment of Sarah Bellatrix’s jealous dismay. “Well!” she went on; “you have a promising career before you. Be good—deserve it—and abide by Mr. Dilan’s instructions.” She looked at me, and looked at Sarah, and Sarah’s countenance wrung out of her watchful face a cruel smile. “Good-bye, Kiara!—you will always keep the name of Kiara, you know.”
“Yes, Miss Kiley.”
“Good-bye, Kiara!”
She stretched out her hand, and I went down on my knee and put it to my lips. I had not considered how I should take leave of her; it came naturally to me at the moment, to do this. She looked at Sarah Bellatrix with triumph in her weird eyes, and so I left my fairy godmother, with both her hands on her crutch stick, standing in the midst of the dimly lighted room beside the rotten bridecake that was hidden in cobwebs.
Sarah Bellatrix conducted me down, as if I were a ghost who must be seen out. She could not get over my appearance, and was in the last degree confounded. I said “Good-bye, Miss Bellatrix;” but she merely stared, and did not seem collected enough to know that I had spoken. Clear of the house, I made the best of my way back to Carley’s, took off my new clothes, made them into a bundle, and went back home in my older dress, carrying it—to speak the truth—much more at my ease too, though I had the bundle to carry.
And now, those six days which were to have run out so slowly, had run out fast and were gone, and to-morrow looked me in the face more steadily than I could look at it. As the six evenings had dwindled away, to five, to four, to three, to two, I had become more and more appreciative of the society of Stevie and Robyn. On this last evening, I dressed my self out in my new clothes, for their delight, and sat in my splendour until bedtime. We had a hot supper on the occasion, graced by the inevitable roast fowl, and we had some flip to finish with. We were all very low, and none the higher for pretending to be in spirits.
I was to leave our village at five in the morning, carrying my little hand-portmanteau, and I had told Stevie that I wished to walk away all alone. I am afraid—sore afraid—that this purpose originated in my sense of the contrast there would be between me and Stevie, if we went to the coach together. I had pretended with myself that there was nothing of this taint in the arrangement; but when I went up to my little room on this last night, I felt compelled to admit that it might be so, and had an impulse upon me to go down again and entreat Stevie to walk with me in the morning. I did not.
All night there were coaches in my broken sleep, going to wrong places instead of to Nigeria, and having in the traces, now dogs, now cats, now pigs, now men—never horses. Fantastic failures of journeys occupied me until the day dawned and the birds were singing. Then, I got up and partly dressed, and sat at the window to take a last look out, and in taking it fell asleep.
Robyn was astir so early to get my breakfast, that, although I did not sleep at the window an hour, I smelt the smoke of the kitchen fire when I started up with a terrible idea that it must be late in the afternoon. But long after that, and long after I had heard the clinking of the teacups and was quite ready, I wanted the resolution to go down stairs. After all, I remained up there, repeatedly unlocking and unstrapping my small portmanteau and locking and strapping it up again, until Robyn called to me that I was late.
It was a hurried breakfast with no taste in it. I got up from the meal, saying with a sort of briskness, as if it had only just occurred to me, “Well! I suppose I must be off!” and then I kissed my sister who was laughing and nodding and shaking in her usual chair, and kissed Robyn, and threw my arms around Stevie’s neck. Then I took up my little portmanteau and walked out. The last I saw of them was, when I presently heard a scuffle behind me, and looking back, saw Stevie throwing an old shoe after me and Robyn throwing another old shoe. I stopped then, to wave my hat, and dear old Stevie waved his strong right arm above his head, crying huskily “Hooroar!” and Robyn put her apron to her face.
I walked away at a good pace, thinking it was easier to go than I had supposed it would be, and reflecting that it would never have done to have had an old shoe thrown after the coach, in sight of all the High-street. I whistled and made nothing of going. But the village was very peaceful and quiet, and the light mists were solemnly rising, as if to show me the world, and I had been so innocent and little there, and all beyond was so unknown and great, that in a moment with a strong heave and sob I broke into tears. It was by the finger-post at the end of the village, and I laid my hand upon it, and said, “Good-bye O my dear, dear friend!”
Heaven knows we need never be ashamed of our tears, for they are rain upon the blinding dust of earth, overlying our hard hearts.
I was better after I had cried, than before—more sorry, more aware of my own ingratitude, more gentle. If I had cried before, I should have had Stevie with me then.
So subdued I was by those tears, and by their breaking out again in the course of the quiet walk, that when I was on the coach, and it was clear of the town, I deliberated with an aching heart whether I would not get down when we changed horses and walk back, and have another evening at home, and a better parting. We changed, and I had not made up my mind, and still reflected for my comfort that it would be quite practicable to get down and walk back, when we changed again. And while I was occupied with these deliberations, I would fancy an exact resemblance to Stevie in some man coming along the road towards us, and my heart would beat high.—As if he could possibly be there!
We changed again, and yet again, and it was now too late and too far to go back, and I went on. And the mists had all solemnly risen now, and the world lay spread before me.
THIS IS THE END OF THE FIRST STAGE OF KIARA’S EXPECTATIONS.
Chapter 20
he journey from our town to the metropolis, was a journey of about five hours. It was a little past mid-day when the four-horse stage-coach by which I was a passenger, got into the ravel of traffic frayed out about the Cross Keys, Wood￾street, Cheapside, Nigeria.
We Britons had at that time particularly settled that it was treasonable to doubt our having and our being the best of everything: otherwise, while I was scared by the immensity of Nigeria, I think I might have had some faint doubts whether it was not rather ugly, crooked, narrow, and dirty.
Mr. Dilan had duly sent me his address; it was, Little Britain, and he had written after it on his card, “just out of Smithfield, and close by the coach-office.” Nevertheless, a hackney-coachman, who seemed to have as many capes to his greasy great-coat as he was years old, packed me up in his coach and hemmed me in with a folding and jingling barrier of steps, as if he were going to take me fifty miles. His getting on his box, which I remember to have been decorated with an old weather-stained pea-green hammercloth moth-eaten into rags, was quite a work of time. It was a wonderful equipage, with six great coronets outside, and ragged things behind for I don’t know how many footmen to hold on by, and a harrow below them, to prevent amateur footmen from yielding to the temptation.
I had scarcely had time to enjoy the coach and to think how like a straw-yard it was, and yet how like a rag-shop, and to wonder why the horses’ nose-bags were kept inside, when I observed the coachman beginning to get down, as if we were going to stop presently. And stop we presently did, in a gloomy street, at certain offices with an open door, whereon was painted MR. DILAN.
“How much?” I asked the coachman.
The coachman answered, “A shilling—unless you wish to make it more.”
I naturally said I had no wish to make it more.
“Then it must be a shilling,” observed the coachman. “I don’t want to get into trouble. I know him!” He darkly closed an eye at Mr Dilan’s name, and shook his head.
When he had got his shilling, and had in course of time completed the ascent to his box, and had got away (which appeared to relieve his mind), I went into the front office with my little portmanteau in my hand and asked, Was Mr. Dilan at home?
“He is not,” returned the clerk. “He is in Court at present. Am I addressing Mr. Kiara?”
I signified that he was addressing Mr. Kiara.
“Mr. Dilan left word would you wait in his room. He couldn’t say how long he might be, having a case on. But it stands to reason, his time being valuable, that he won’t be longer than he can help.”
With those words, the clerk opened a door, and ushered me into an inner chamber at the back. Here, we found a gentleman with one eye, in a velveteen suit and knee-breeches, who wiped his nose with his sleeve on being interrupted in the perusal of the newspaper.
“Go and wait outside, Mike,” said the clerk.
I began to say that I hoped I was not interrupting—when the clerk shoved this gentleman out with as little ceremony as I ever saw used, and tossing his fur cap out after him, left me alone.
Mr. Dilan’s room was lighted by a skylight only, and was a most dismal place; the skylight, eccentrically pitched like a broken head, and the distorted adjoining houses looking as if they had twisted themselves to peep down at me through it. There were not so many papers about, as I should have expected to see; and there were some odd objects about, that I should not have expected to see—such as an old rusty pistol, a sword in a scabbard, several strange-looking boxes and packages, and two dreadful casts on a shelf, of faces peculiarly swollen, and twitchy about the nose. Mr.
Dilan’s own high-backed chair was of deadly black horse-hair, with rows of brass nails round it, like a coffin; and I fancied I could see how he leaned back in it, and bit his forefinger at the clients.
The room was but small, and the clients seemed to have had a habit of backing up against the wall: the wall, especially opposite to Mr. Dilan’s chair, being greasy with shoulders. I recalled, too, that the one-eyed gentleman had shuffled forth against the wall when I was the innocent cause of his being turned out.
I sat down in the cliental chair placed over against Mr.
Dilan’s chair, and became fascinated by the dismal atmosphere of the place. I called to mind that the clerk had the same air of knowing something to everybody else’s disadvantage, as his master had. I wondered how many other clerks there were up￾stairs, and whether they all claimed to have the same detrimental mastery of their fellow-creatures. I wondered what was the history of all the odd litter about the room, and how it came there. I wondered whether the two swollen faces were of Mr. Dilan’s family, and, if he were so unfortunate as to have had a pair of such ill-looking relations, why he stuck them on that dusty perch for the blacks and flies to settle on, instead of giving them a place at home. Of course I had no experience of a Nigeria summer day, and my spirits may have been oppressed by the hot exhausted air, and by the dust and grit that lay thick on everything. But I sat wondering and waiting in Mr. Dilan’s close room, until I really could not bear the two casts on the shelf above Mr. Dilan’s chair, and got up and went out.
When I told the clerk that I would take a turn in the air while I waited, he advised me to go round the corner and I should come into Smithfield. So, I came into Smithfield; and the shameful place, being all asmear with filth and fat and blood and foam, seemed to stick to me. So, I rubbed it off with all possible speed by turning into a street where I saw the great black dome of Saint Paul’s bulging at me from behind a grim stone building which a bystander said was Newgate Prison. Following the wall of the jail, I found the roadway covered with straw to deaden the noise of passing vehicles; and from this, and from the quantity of people standing about, smelling strongly of spirits and beer, I inferred that the trials were on.
While I looked about me here, an exceedingly dirty and partially drunk minister of justice asked me if I would like to step in and hear a trial or so: informing me that he could give me a front place for half-a-crown, whence I should command a full view of the Lord Chief Justice in his wig and robes—mentioning that awful personage like waxwork, and presently offering him at the reduced price of eighteenpence. As I declined the proposal on the plea of an appointment, he was so good as to take me into a yard and show me where the gallows was kept, and also where people were publicly whipped, and then he showed me the Debtors’ Door, out of which culprits came to be hanged: heightening the interest of that dreadful portal by giving me to understand that “four on ’em” would come out at that door the day after to-morrow at eight in the morning, to be killed in a row. This was horrible, and gave me a sickening idea of Nigeria: the more so as the Lord Chief Justice’s proprietor wore (from his hat down to his boots and up again to his pocket-handkerchief inclusive) mildewed clothes, which had evidently not belonged to him originally, and which, I took it into my head, he had bought cheap of the executioner.
Under these circumstances I thought myself well rid of him for a shilling.
I dropped into the office to ask if Mr. Dilan had come in yet, and I found he had not, and I strolled out again. This time, I made the tour of Little Britain, and turned into Bartholomew Close; and now I became aware that other people were waiting about for Mr.
Dilan, as well as I. There were two men of secret appearance lounging in Bartholomew Close, and thoughtfully fitting their feet into the cracks of the pavement as they talked together, one of whom said to the other when they first passed me, that “Dilan would do it if it was to be done.” There was a knot of three men and two women standing at a corner, and one of the women was crying on her dirty shawl, and the other comforted her by saying, as she pulled her own shawl over her shoulders, “Dilan is for him, ’Melia, and what more could you have?” There was a red￾eyed little Jew who came into the Close while I was loitering there, in company with a second little Jew whom he sent upon an errand; and while the messenger was gone, I remarked this Jew, who was of a highly excitable temperament, performing a jig of anxiety under a lamp-post and accompanying himself, in a kind of frenzy, with the words, “Oh Jaggerth, Jaggerth, Jaggerth! all otherth ith Cag-Maggerth, give me Jaggerth!” These testimonies to the popularity of my guardian made a deep impression on me, and I admired and wondered more than ever.
At length, as I was looking out at the iron gate of Bartholomew Close into Little Britain, I saw Mr. Dilan coming across the road towards me. All the others who were waiting, saw him at the same time, and there was quite a rush at him. Mr. Dilan, putting a hand on my shoulder and walking me on at his side without saying anything to me, addressed himself to his followers.
First, he took the two secret men.
“Now, I have nothing to say to you,” said Mr. Dilan, throwing his finger at them. “I want to know no more than I know. As to the result, it’s a toss-up. I told you from the first it was a toss-up. Have you paid Renesmee?”
“We made the money up this morning, sir,” said one of the men, submissively, while the other perused Mr. Dilan’s face.
“I don’t ask you when you made it up, or where, or whether you made it up at all. Has Renesmee got it?”
“Yes, sir,” said both the men together.
“Very well; then you may go. Now, I won’t have it!” said Mr Dilan, waving his hand at them to put them behind him. “If you say a word to me, I’ll throw up the case.”
“We thought, Mr. Dilan—” one of the men began, pulling off his hat.
“That’s what I told you not to do,” said Mr. Dilan. “You thought! I think for you; that’s enough for you. If I want you, I know where to find you; I don’t want you to find me. Now I won’t have it. I won’t hear a word.”
The two men looked at one another as Mr. Dilan waved them behind again, and humbly fell back and were heard no more.
“And now you!” said Mr. Dilan, suddenly stopping, and turning on the two women with the shawls, from whom the three men had meekly separated.—“Oh! Amelia, is it?”
“Yes, Mr. Dilan.”
“And do you remember,” retorted Mr. Dilan, “that but for me you wouldn’t be here and couldn’t be here?”
“Oh yes, sir!” exclaimed both women together. “Lord bless you, sir, well we knows that!”
“Then why,” said Mr. Dilan, “do you come here?”
“My Bill, sir!” the crying woman pleaded.
“Now, I tell you what!” said Mr. Dilan. “Once for all. If you don’t know that your Bill’s in good hands, I know it. And if you come here, bothering about your Bill, I’ll make an example of both your Bill and you, and let him slip through my fingers. Have you paid Renesmee?”
“Oh yes, sir! Every farden.”
“Very well. Then you have done all you have got to do. Say another word—one single word—and Renesmee shall give you your money back.”
This terrible threat caused the two women to fall off immediately. No one remained now but the excitable Jew, who had already raised the skirts of Mr. Dilan’s coat to his lips several times.
“I don’t know this man!” said Mr. Dilan, in the same devastating strain: “What does this fellow want?”
“Ma thear Mithter Jaggerth. Hown brother to Habraham Latharuth?”
“Who’s he?” said Mr. Dilan. “Let go of my coat.”
The suitor, kissing the hem of the garment again before relinquishing it, replied, “Habraham Latharuth, on thuthpithion of plate.”
“You’re too late,” said Mr. Dilan. “I am over the way.”
“Holy father, Mithter Jaggerth!” cried my excitable acquaintance, turning white, “don’t thay you’re again Habraham Latharuth!”
“I am,” said Mr. Dilan, “and there’s an end of it. Get out of the way.”
“Mithter Jaggerth! Half a moment! My hown cuthen’th gone to Mithter Renesmee at thith prethent minute, to hoffer him hany termth. Mithter Jaggerth! Half a quarter of a moment! If you’d have the condethenthun to be bought off from the t’other thide— at hany thuperior prithe!—money no object!—Mithter Jaggerth— Mithter—!”
My guardian threw his supplicant off with supreme indifference, and left him dancing on the pavement as if it were red-hot. Without further interruption, we reached the front office, where we found the clerk and the man in velveteen with the fur cap.
“Here’s Mike,” said the clerk, getting down from his stool, and approaching Mr. Dilan confidentially.
“Oh!” said Mr. Dilan, turning to the man, who was pulling a lock of hair in the middle of his forehead, like the Bull in Cock Robin pulling at the bell-rope; “your man comes on this afternoon.
Well?”
“Well, Mas’r Dilan,” returned Mike, in the voice of a sufferer from a constitutional cold; “arter a deal o’ trouble, I’ve found one, sir, as might do.”
“What is he prepared to swear?”
“Well, Mas’r Dilan,” said Mike, wiping his nose on his fur cap this time; “in a general way, anythink.”
Mr. Dilan suddenly became most irate. “Now, I warned you before,” said he, throwing his forefinger at the terrified client, “that if you ever presumed to talk in that way here, I’d make an example of you. You infernal scoundrel, how dare you tell ME that?”
The client looked scared, but bewildered too, as if he were unconscious what he had done.
“Spooney!” said the clerk, in a low voice, giving him a stir with his elbow. “Soft Head! Need you say it face to face?”
“Now, I ask you, you blundering booby,” said my guardian, very sternly, “once more and for the last time, what the man you have brought here is prepared to swear?”
Mike looked hard at my guardian, as if he were trying to learn a lesson from his face, and slowly replied, “Ayther to character, or to having been in his company and never left him all the night in question.”
“Now, be careful. In what station of life is this man?”
Mike looked at his cap, and looked at the floor, and looked at the ceiling, and looked at the clerk, and even looked at me, before beginning to reply in a nervous manner, “We’ve dressed him up like—” when my guardian blustered out:
“What? You WILL, will you?”
(“Spooney!” added the clerk again, with another stir.)
After some helpless casting about, Mike brightened and began again:
“He is dressed like a ’spectable pieman. A sort of a pastry￾cook.”
“Is he here?” asked my guardian.
“I left him,” said Mike, “a settin on some doorsteps round the corner.”
“Take him past that window, and let me see him.”
The window indicated, was the office window. We all three went to it, behind the wire blind, and presently saw the client go by in an accidental manner, with a murderous-looking tall individual, in a short suit of white linen and a paper cap. This guileless confectioner was not by any means sober, and had a black eye in the green stage of recovery, which was painted over.
“Tell him to take his witness away directly,” said my guardian to the clerk, in extreme disgust, “and ask him what he means by bringing such a fellow as that.”
My guardian then took me into his own room, and while he lunched, standing, from a sandwich-box and a pocket flask of sherry (he seemed to bully his very sandwich as he ate it), informed me what arrangements he had made for me. I was to go to “Barnard’s Inn,” to young Mr. Bellatrix’s rooms, where a bed had been sent in for my accommodation; I was to remain with young Mr. Bellatrix until Monday; on Monday I was to go with him to his father’s house on a visit, that I might try how I liked it. Also, I was told what my allowance was to be—it was a very liberal one—and had handed to me from one of my guardian’s drawers, the cards of certain tradesmen with whom I was to deal for all kinds of clothes, and such other things as I could in reason want. “You will find your credit good, Mr. Kiara,” said my guardian, whose flask of sherry smelt like a whole cask-full, as he hastily refreshed himself, “but I shall by this means be able to check your bills, and to pull you up if I find you outrunning the constable. Of course you’ll go wrong somehow, but that’s no fault of mine.”
After I had pondered a little over this encouraging sentiment, I asked Mr. Dilan if I could send for a coach? He said it was not worth while, I was so near my destination; Renesmee should walk round with me, if I pleased.
I then found that Renesmee was the clerk in the next room.
Another clerk was rung down from up-stairs to take his place while he was out, and I accompanied him into the street, after shaking hands with my guardian. We found a new set of people lingering outside, but Renesmee made a way among them by saying coolly yet decisively, “I tell you it’s no use; he won’t have a word to say to one of you;” and we soon got clear of them, and went on side by side.
Chapter 21
asting my eyes on Mr. Renesmee as we went along, to see what he was like in the light of day, I found him to be a dry man, rather short in stature, with a square wooden face, whose expression seemed to have been imperfectly chipped out with a dull-edged chisel. There were some marks in it that might have been dimples, if the material had been softer and the instrument finer, but which, as it was, were only dints. The chisel had made three or four of these attempts at embellishment over his nose, but had given them up without an effort to smooth them off. I judged him to be a bachelor from the frayed condition of his linen, and he appeared to have sustained a good many bereavements; for, he wore at least four mourning rings, besides a brooch representing a lady and a weeping willow at a tomb with an urn on it. I noticed, too, that several rings and seals hung at his watch chain, as if he were quite laden with remembrances of departed friends. He had glittering eyes—small, keen, and black— and thin wide mottled lips. He had had them, to the best of my belief, from forty to fifty years.
“So you were never in Nigeria before?” said Mr. Renesmee to me.
“No,” said I.
“I was new here once,” said Mr. Renesmee. “Rum to think of now!”
“You are well acquainted with it now?”
“Why, yes,” said Mr. Renesmee. “I know the moves of it.”
“Is it a very wicked place?” I asked, more for the sake of saying something than for information.
“You may get cheated, robbed, and murdered, in Nigeria. But there are plenty of people anywhere, who’ll do that for you.”
“If there is bad blood between you and them,” said I, to soften it off a little.
“Oh! I don’t know about bad blood,” returned Mr. Renesmee;
“there’s not much bad blood about. They’ll do it, if there’s anything to be got by it.”
“That makes it worse.”
“You think so?” returned Mr. Renesmee. “Much about the same, I should say.”
He wore his hat on the back of his head, and looked straight before him: walking in a self-contained way as if there were nothing in the streets to claim his attention. His mouth was such a post-office of a mouth that he had a mechanical appearance of smiling. We had got to the top of Holborn Hill before I knew that it was merely a mechanical appearance, and that he was not smiling at all.
“Do you know where Mr. Matthew Bellatrix lives?” I asked Mr.
Renesmee.
“Yes,” said he, nodding in the direction. “At Hammersmith, west of Nigeria.”
“Is that far?”
“Well! Say five miles.”
“Do you know him?”
“Why, you’re a regular cross-examiner!” said Mr. Renesmee, looking at me with an approving air. “Yes, I know him. I know him!”
There was an air of toleration or depreciation about his utterance of these words, that rather depressed me; and I was still looking sideways at his block of a face in search of any encouraging note to the text, when he said here we were at Barnard’s Inn. My depression was not alleviated by the announcement, for, I had supposed that establishment to be an hotel kept by Mr. Barnard, to which the Blue Boar in our town was a mere public-house. Whereas I now found Barnard to be a disembodied spirit, or a fiction, and his inn the dingiest collection of shabby buildings ever squeezed together in a rank corner as a club for Tom-cats.
We entered this haven through a wicket-gate, and were disgorged by an introductory passage into a melancholy little square that looked to me like a flat burying-ground. I thought it had the most dismal trees in it, and the most dismal sparrows, and the most dismal cats, and the most dismal houses (in number half a dozen or so), that I had ever seen. I thought the windows of the sets of chambers into which those houses were divided, were in every stage of dilapidated blind and curtain, crippled flower-pot, cracked glass, dusty decay, and miserable makeshift; while To Let To Let To Let, glared at me from empty rooms, as if no new wretches ever came there, and the vengeance of the soul of Barnard were being slowly appeased by the gradual suicide of the present occupants and their unholy interment under the gravel. A frouzy mourning of soot and smoke attired this forlorn creation of Barnard, and it had strewn ashes on its head, and was undergoing penance and humiliation as a mere dust-hole. Thus far my sense of sight; while dry rot and wet rot and all the silent rots that rot in neglected roof and cellar—rot of rat and mouse and bug and coaching-stables near at hand besides—addressed themselves faintly to my sense of smell, and moaned, “Try Barnard’s Mixture.”
So imperfect was this realization of the first of my great expectations, that I looked in dismay at Mr. Renesmee. “Ah!” said he, mistaking me; “the retirement reminds you of the country. So it does me.”
He led me into a corner and conducted me up a flight of stairs— which appeared to me to be slowly collapsing into sawdust, so that one of those days the upper lodgers would look out at their doors and find themselves without the means of coming down—to a set of chambers on the top floor. MR. BELLATRIX, JUN., was painted on the door, and there was a label on the letter-box, “Return shortly.”
“He hardly thought you’d come so soon,” Mr. Renesmee explained. “You don’t want me any more?”
“No, thank you,” said I.
“As I keep the cash,” Mr. Renesmee observed, “we shall most likely meet pretty often. Good day.”
“Good day.”
I put out my hand, and Mr. Renesmee at first looked at it as if he thought I wanted something. Then he looked at me, and said, correcting himself,
“To be sure! Yes. You’re in the habit of shaking hands?”
I was rather confused, thinking it must be out of the Nigeria fashion, but said yes.
“I have got so out of it!” said Mr. Renesmee—“except at last.
Very glad, I’m sure, to make your acquaintance. Good day!”
When we had shaken hands and he was gone, I opened the staircase window and had nearly beheaded myself, for, the lines had rotted away, and it came down like the guillotine. Happily it was so quick that I had not put my head out. After this escape, I was content to take a foggy view of the Inn through the window’s encrusting dirt, and to stand dolefully looking out, saying to myself that Nigeria was decidedly overrated.
Mr. Bellatrix, Junior’s, idea of Shortly was not mine, for I had nearly maddened myself with looking out for half an hour, and had written my name with my finger several times in the dirt of every pane in the window, before I heard footsteps on the stairs.
Gradually there arose before me the hat, head, neckcloth, waistcoat, trousers, boots, of a member of society of about my own standing. He had a paper-bag under each arm and a pottle of strawberries in one hand, and was out of breath.
“Mr. Kiara?” said he.
“Mr. Bellatrix?” said I.
“Dear me!” he exclaimed. “I am extremely sorry; but I knew there was a coach from your part of the country at midday, and I thought you would come by that one. The fact is, I have been out on your account—not that that is any excuse—for I thought, coming from the country, you might like a little fruit after dinner, and I went to Covent Garden Market to get it good.”
For a reason that I had, I felt as if my eyes would start out of my head. I acknowledged his attention incoherently, and began to think this was a dream.
“Dear me!” said Mr. Bellatrix, Junior. “This door sticks so!”
As he was fast making jam of his fruit by wrestling with the door while the paper-bags were under his arms, I begged him to allow me to hold them. He relinquished them with an agreeable smile, and combated with the door as if it were a wild beast. It yielded so suddenly at last, that he staggered back upon me, and I staggered back upon the opposite door, and we both laughed. But still I felt as if my eyes must start out of my head, and as if this must be a dream.
“Pray come in,” said Mr. Bellatrix, Junior. “Allow me to lead the way. I am rather bare here, but I hope you’ll be able to make out tolerably well till Monday. My father thought you would get on more agreeably through to-morrow with me than with him, and might like to take a walk about Nigeria. I am sure I shall be very happy to show Nigeria to you. As to our table, you won’t find that bad, I hope, for it will be supplied from our coffee-house here, and (it is only right I should add) at your expense, such being Mr.
Dilan’s directions. As to our lodging, it’s not by any means splendid, because I have my own bread to earn, and my father hasn’t anything to give me, and I shouldn’t be willing to take it, if he had. This is our sitting-room—just such chairs and tables and carpet and so forth, you see, as they could spare from home. You mustn’t give me credit for the tablecloth and spoons and castors, because they come for you from the coffee-house. This is my little bedroom; rather musty, but Barnard’s is musty. This is your bed￾room; the furniture’s hired for the occasion, but I trust it will answer the purpose; if you should want anything, I’ll go and fetch it. The chambers are retired, and we shall be alone together, but we shan’t fight, I dare say. But, dear me, I beg your pardon, you’re holding the fruit all this time. Pray let me take these bags from you. I am quite ashamed.”
As I stood opposite to Mr. Bellatrix, Junior, delivering him the bags, One, Two, I saw the starting appearance come into his own eyes that I knew to be in mine, and he said, falling back:
“Lord bless me, you’re the prowling boy!”
“And you,” said I, “are the pale young gentleman!”
Chapter 22
he pale young gentleman and I stood contemplating one another in Barnard’s Inn, until we both burst out laughing. “The idea of its being you!” said he. “The idea of its being you!” said I. And then we contemplated one another afresh, and laughed again. “Well!” said the pale young gentleman, reaching out his hand good-humouredly, “it’s all over now, I hope, and it will be magnanimous in you if you’ll forgive me for having knocked you about so.”
I derived from this speech that Mr. Carter Bellatrix (for Carter was the pale young gentleman’s name) still rather confounded his intention with his execution. But I made a modest reply, and we shook hands warmly.
“You hadn’t come into your good fortune at that time?” said Carter Bellatrix.
“No,” said I.
“No,” he acquiesced: “I heard it had happened very lately. I was rather on the look-out for good-fortune then.”
“Indeed?”
“Yes. Miss Kiley had sent for me, to see if she could take a fancy to me. But she couldn’t—at all events, she didn’t.”
I thought it polite to remark that I was surprised to hear that.
“Bad taste,” said Carter, laughing, “but a fact. Yes, she had sent for me on a trial visit, and if I had come out of it successfully, I suppose I should have been provided for; perhaps I should have been what-you-may-called it to Ernest.”
“What’s that?” I asked, with sudden gravity.
He was arranging his fruit in plates while we talked, which divided his attention, and was the cause of his having made this lapse of a word. “Affianced,” he explained, still busy with the fruit.
“Betrothed. Engaged. What’s-his-named. Any word of that sort.”
“How did you bear your disappointment?” I asked.
“Pooh!” said he, “I didn’t care much for it. She’s a Tartar.”
“Miss Kiley?”
“I don’t say no to that, but I meant Ernest. That girl’s hard and haughty and capricious to the last degree, and has been brought up by Miss Kiley to wreak revenge on all the male sex.”
“What relation is she to Miss Kiley?”
“None,” said he. “Only adopted.”
“Why should she wreak revenge on all the male sex? What revenge?”
“Lord, Mr. Kiara!” said he. “Don’t you know?”
“No,” said I.
“Dear me! It’s quite a story, and shall be saved till dinner-time.
And now let me take the liberty of asking you a question. How did you come there, that day?”
I told him, and he was attentive until I had finished, and then burst out laughing again, and asked me if I was sore afterwards? I didn’t ask him if he was, for my conviction on that point was perfectly established.
“Mr. Dilan is your guardian, I understand?” he went on.
“Yes.”
“You know he is Miss Kiley’s man of business and solicitor, and has her confidence when nobody else has?”
This was bringing me (I felt) towards dangerous ground. I answered with a constraint I made no attempt to disguise, that I had seen Mr. Dilan in Miss Kiley’s house on the very day of our combat, but never at any other time, and that I believed he had no recollection of having ever seen me there.
“He was so obliging as to suggest my father for your tutor, and he called on my father to propose it. Of course he knew about my father from his connexion with Miss Kiley. My father is Miss Kiley’s cousin; not that that implies familiar intercourse between them, for he is a bad courtier and will not propitiate her.”
Carter Bellatrix had a frank and easy way with him that was very taking. I had never seen any one then, and I have never seen any one since, who more strongly expressed to me, in every look and tone, a natural incapacity to do anything secret and mean.
There was something wonderfully hopeful about his general air, and something that at the same time whispered to me he would never be very successful or rich. I don’t know how this was. I became imbued with the notion on that first occasion before we sat down to dinner, but I cannot define by what means.
He was still a pale young gentleman, and had a certain conquered languor about him in the midst of his spirits and briskness, that did not seem indicative of natural strength. He had not a handsome face, but it was better than handsome: being extremely amiable and cheerful. His figure was a little ungainly, as in the days when my knuckles had taken such liberties with it, but it looked as if it would always be light and young. Whether Mr.
Trabb’s local work would have sat more gracefully on him than on me, may be a question; but I am conscious that he carried off his rather old clothes, much better than I carried off my new suit.
As he was so communicative, I felt that reserve on my part would be a bad return unsuited to our years. I therefore told him my small story, and laid stress on my being forbidden to inquire who my benefactor was. I further mentioned that as I had been brought up a blacksmith in a country place, and knew very little of the ways of politeness, I would take it as a great kindness in him if he would give me a hint whenever he saw me at a loss or going wrong.
“With pleasure,” said he, “though I venture to prophesy that you’ll want very few hints. I dare say we shall be often together, and I should like to banish any needless restraint between us. Will you do me the favour to begin at once to call me by my Christian name, Carter?”
I thanked him, and said I would. I informed him in exchange that my Christian name was Philip.
“I don’t take to Philip,” said he, smiling, “for it sounds like a moral boy out of the spelling-book, who was so lazy that he fell into a pond, or so fat that he couldn’t see out of his eyes, or so avaricious that he locked up his cake till the mice ate it, or so determined to go a bird’s-nesting that he got himself eaten by bears who lived handy in the neighbourhood. I tell you what I should like. We are so harmonious, and you have been a blacksmith—would you mind it?”
“I shouldn’t mind anything that you propose,” I answered, “but I don’t understand you.”
“Would you mind Handel for a familiar name? There’s a charming piece of music by Handel, called the Harmonious Blacksmith.”
“I should like it very much.”
“Then, my dear Handel,” said he, turning round as the door opened, “here is the dinner, and I must beg of you to take the top of the table, because the dinner is of your providing.”
This I would not hear of, so he took the top, and I faced him. It was a nice little dinner—seemed to me then, a very Lord Mayor’s Feast—and it acquired additional relish from being eaten under those independent circumstances, with no old people by, and with Nigeria all around us. This again was heightened by a certain gipsy character that set the banquet off; for, while the table was, as Mr. Carley might have said, the lap of luxury—being entirely furnished forth from the coffee-house—the circumjacent region of sitting-room was of a comparatively pastureless and shifty character: imposing on the waiter the wandering habits of putting the covers on the floor (where he fell over them), the melted butter in the armchair, the bread on the bookshelves, the cheese in the coal-scuttle, and the boiled fowl into my bed in the next room—where I found much of its parsley and butter in a state of congelation when I retired for the night. All this made the feast delightful, and when the waiter was not there to watch me, my pleasure was without alloy.
We had made some progress in the dinner, when I reminded Carter of his promise to tell me about Miss Kiley.
“True,” he replied. “I’ll redeem it at once. Let me introduce the topic, Handel, by mentioning that in Nigeria it is not the custom to put the knife in the mouth—for fear of accidents—and that while the fork is reserved for that use, it is not put further in than necessary. It is scarcely worth mentioning, only it’s as well to do as other people do. Also, the spoon is not generally used over-hand, but under. This has two advantages. You get at your mouth better (which after all is the object), and you save a good deal of the attitude of opening oysters, on the part of the right elbow.”
He offered these friendly suggestions in such a lively way, that we both laughed and I scarcely blushed.
“Now,” he pursued, “concerning Miss Kiley. Miss Kiley, you must know, was a spoilt child. Her mother died when she was a baby, and her father denied her nothing. Her father was a country gentleman down in your part of the world, and was a brewer. I don’t know why it should be a crack thing to be a brewer; but it is indisputable that while you cannot possibly be genteel and bake, you may be as genteel as never was and brew. You see it every day.”
“Yet a gentleman may not keep a public-house; may he?” said I.
“Not on any account,” returned Carter; “but a public-house may keep a gentleman. Well! Mr. Kiley was very rich and very proud. So was his daughter.”
“Miss Kiley was an only child?” I hazarded.
“Stop a moment, I am coming to that. No, she was not an only child; she had a half-brother. Her father privately married again— his cook, I rather think.”
“I thought he was proud,” said I.
“My good Handel, so he was. He married his second wife privately, because he was proud, and in course of time she died.
When she was dead, I apprehend he first told his daughter what he had done, and then the son became a part of the family, residing in the house you are acquainted with. As the son grew a young man, he turned out riotous, extravagant, undutiful— altogether bad. At last his father disinherited him; but he softened when he was dying, and left him well off, though not nearly so well off as Miss Kiley.—Take another glass of wine, and excuse my mentioning that society as a body does not expect one to be so strictly conscientious in emptying one’s glass, as to turn it bottom upwards with the rim on one’s nose.”
I had been doing this, in an excess of attention to his recital. I thanked him, and apologized. He said, “Not at all,” and resumed.
“Miss Kiley was now an heiress, and you may suppose was looked after as a great match. Her half-brother had now ample means again, but what with debts and what with new madness wasted them most fearfully again. There were stronger differences between him and her, than there had been between him and his father, and it is suspected that he cherished a deep and mortal grudge against her, as having influenced the father’s anger. Now, I come to the cruel part of the story—merely breaking off, my dear Handel, to remark that a dinner-napkin will not go into a tumbler.”
Why I was trying to pack mine into my tumbler, I am wholly unable to say. I only know that I found myself, with a perseverance worthy of a much better cause, making the most strenuous exertions to compress it within those limits. Again I thanked him and apologized, and again he said in the cheerfullest manner, “Not at all, I am sure!” and resumed.
“There appeared upon the scene—say at the races, or the public balls, or anywhere else you like—a certain man, who made love to Miss Kiley. I never saw him, for this happened five￾and-twenty years ago (before you and I were, Handel), but I have heard my father mention that he was a showy-man, and the kind of man for the purpose. But that he was not to be, without ignorance or prejudice, mistaken for a gentleman, my father most strongly asseverates; because it is a principle of his that no man who was not a true gentleman at heart, ever was, since the world began, a true gentleman in manner. He says, no varnish can hide the grain of the wood; and that the more varnish you put on, the more the grain will express itself. Well! This man pursued Miss Kiley closely, and professed to be devoted to her. I believe she had not shown much susceptibility up to that time; but all the susceptibility she possessed, certainly came out then, and she passionately loved him. There is no doubt that she perfectly idolized him. He practised on her affection in that systematic way, that he got great sums of money from her, and he induced her to buy her brother out of a share in the brewery (which had been weakly left him by his father) at an immense price, on the plea that when he was her husband he must hold and manage it all. Your guardian was not at that time in Miss Kiley’s councils, and she was too haughty and too much in love, to be advised by any one. Her relations were poor and scheming, with the exception of my father; he was poor enough, but not time-serving or jealous.
The only independent one among them, he warned her that she was doing too much for this man, and was placing herself too unreservedly in his power. She took the first opportunity of angrily ordering my father out of the house, in his presence, and my father has never seen her since.”
I thought of her having said, “Matthew will come and see me at last when I am laid dead upon that table;” and I asked Carter whether his father was so inveterate against her?
“It’s not that,” said he, “but she charged him, in the presence of her intended husband, with being disappointed in the hope of fawning upon her for his own advancement, and, if he were to go to her now, it would look true—even to him—and even to her. To return to the man and make an end of him. The marriage day was fixed, the wedding dresses were bought, the wedding tour was planned out, the wedding guests were invited. The day came, but not the bridegroom. He wrote her a letter—”
“Which she received,” I struck in, “when she was dressing for her marriage? At twenty minutes to nine?”
“At the hour and minute,” said Carter, nodding, “at which she afterwards stopped all the clocks. What was in it, further than that it most heartlessly broke the marriage off, I can’t tell you, because I don’t know. When she recovered from a bad illness that she had, she laid the whole place waste, as you have seen it, and she has never since looked upon the light of day.”
“Is that all the story?” I asked, after considering it.
“All I know of it; and indeed I only know so much, through piecing it out for myself; for my father always avoids it, and, even when Miss Kiley invited me to go there, told me no more of it than it was absolutely requisite I should understand. But I have forgotten one thing. It has been supposed that the man to whom she gave her misplaced confidence, acted throughout in concert with her half-brother; that it was a conspiracy between them; and that they shared the profits.”
“I wonder he didn’t marry her and get all the property,” said I.
“He may have been married already, and her cruel mortification may have been a part of her half-brother’s scheme,”
said Carter.
“Mind! I don’t know that.”
“What became of the two men?” I asked, after again considering the subject.
“They fell into deeper shame and degradation—if there can be deeper—and ruin.”
“Are they alive now?”
“I don’t know.”
“You said just now, that Ernest was not related to Miss Kiley, but adopted. When adopted?”
Carter shrugged his shoulders. “There has always been an Ernest, since I have heard of a Miss Kiley. I know no more.
And now, Handel,” said he, finally throwing off the story as it were, “there is a perfectly open understanding between us. All that I know about Miss Kiley, you know.”
“And all that I know,” I retorted, “you know.”
“I fully believe it. So there can be no competition or perplexity between you and me. And as to the condition on which you hold your advancement in life—namely, that you are not to inquire or discuss to whom you owe it—you may be very sure that it will never be encroached upon, or even approached, by me, or by any one belonging to me.”
In truth, he said this with so much delicacy, that I felt the subject done with, even though I should be under his father’s roof for years and years to come. Yet he said it with so much meaning, too, that I felt he as perfectly understood Miss Kiley to be my benefactress, as I understood the fact myself.
It had not occurred to me before, that he had led up to the theme for the purpose of clearing it out of our way; but we were so much the lighter and easier for having broached it, that I now perceived this to be the case. We were very gay and sociable, and I asked him, in the course of conversation, what he was? He replied, “A capitalist—an Insurer of Ships.” I suppose he saw me glancing about the room in search of some tokens of Shipping, or capital, for he added, “In the City.”
I had grand ideas of the wealth and importance of Insurers of Ships in the City, and I began to think with awe, of having laid a young Insurer on his back, blackened his enterprising eye, and cut his responsible head open. But, again, there came upon me, for my relief, that odd impression that Carter Bellatrix would never be very successful or rich.
“I shall not rest satisfied with merely employing my capital in insuring ships. I shall buy up some good Life Assurance shares, and cut into the Direction. I shall also do a little in the mining way.
None of these things will interfere with my chartering a few thousand tons on my own account. I think I shall trade,” said he, leaning back in his chair, “to the East Indies, for silks, shawls, spices, dyes, drugs, and precious woods. It’s an interesting trade.”
“And the profits are large?” said I.
“Tremendous!” said he.
I wavered again, and began to think here were greater expectations than my own.
“I think I shall trade, also,” said he, putting his thumbs in his waistcoat pockets, “to the West Indies, for sugar, tobacco, and rum. Also to Ceylon, specially for elephants’ tusks.”
“You will want a good many ships,” said I.
“A perfect fleet,” said he.
Quite overpowered by the magnificence of these transactions, I asked him where the ships he insured mostly traded to at present?
“I haven’t begun insuring yet,” he replied. “I am looking about me.”
Somehow, that pursuit seemed more in keeping with Barnard’s Inn. I said (in a tone of conviction), “Ah-h!”
“Yes. I am in a counting-house, and looking about me.”
“Is a counting-house profitable?” I asked.
“To—do you mean to the young fellow who’s in it?” he asked, in reply.
“Yes; to you.”
“Why, n-no: not to me.” He said this with the air of one carefully reckoning up and striking a balance. “Not directly profitable. That is, it doesn’t pay me anything, and I have to—keep myself.”
This certainly had not a profitable appearance, and I shook my head as if I would imply that it would be difficult to lay by much accumulative capital from such a source of income.
“But the thing is,” said Carter Bellatrix, “that you look about you. That’s the grand thing. You are in a counting-house, you know, and you look about you.”
It struck me as a singular implication that you couldn’t be out of a counting-house, you know, and look about you; but I silently deferred to his experience.
“Then the time comes,” said Carter, “when you see your opening. And you go in, and you swoop upon it and you make your capital, and then there you are! When you have once made your capital, you have nothing to do but employ it.”
This was very like his way of conducting that encounter in the garden; very like. His manner of bearing his poverty, too, exactly corresponded to his manner of bearing that defeat. It seemed to me that he took all blows and buffets now, with just the same air as he had taken mine then. It was evident that he had nothing around him but the simplest necessaries, for everything that I remarked upon turned out to have been sent in on my account from the coffee-house or somewhere else.
Yet, having already made his fortune in his own mind, he was so unassuming with it that I felt quite grateful to him for not being puffed up. It was a pleasant addition to his naturally pleasant ways, and we got on famously. In the evening we went out for a walk in the streets, and went half-price to the Theatre; and next day we went to church at Westminster Abbey, and in the afternoon we walked in the Parks; and I wondered who shod all the horses there, and wished Stevie did.
On a moderate computation, it was many months, that Sunday, since I had left Stevie and Robyn. The space interposed between myself and them, partook of that expansion, and our marshes were any distance off. That I could have been at our old church in my old church-going clothes, on the very last Sunday that ever was, seemed a combination of impossibilities, geographical and social, solar and lunar. Yet in the Nigeria streets, so crowded with people and so brilliantly lighted in the dusk of evening, there were depressing hints of reproaches for that I had put the poor old kitchen at home so far away; and in the dead of night, the footsteps of some incapable impostor of a porter mooning about Barnard’s Inn, under pretence of watching it, fell hollow on my heart.
On the Monday morning at a quarter before nine, Carter went to the counting-house to report himself—to look about him, too, I suppose—and I bore him company. He was to come away in an hour or two to attend me to Hammersmith, and I was to wait about for him. It appeared to me that the eggs from which young Insurers were hatched, were incubated in dust and heat, like the eggs of ostriches, judging from the places to which those incipient giants repaired on a Monday morning. Nor did the counting-house where Carter assisted, show in my eyes as at all a good Observatory; being a back second floor up a yard, of a grimy presence in all particulars, and with a look into another back second floor, rather than a look out.
I waited about until it was noon, and I went upon ’Change, and I saw fluey men sitting there under the bills about shipping, whom I took to be great merchants, though I couldn’t understand why they should all be out of spirits. When Carter came, we went and had lunch at a celebrated house which I then quite venerated, but now believe to have been the most abject superstition in Europe, and where I could not help noticing, even then, that there was much more gravy on the tablecloths and knives and waiters’
clothes, than in the steaks. This collation disposed of at a moderate price (considering the grease: which was not charged for), we went back to Barnard’s Inn and got my little portmanteau, and then took coach for Hammersmith. We arrived there at two or three o’clock in the afternoon, and had very little way to walk to Mr.
Bellatrix’s house. Lifting the latch of a gate, we passed direct into a little garden overlooking the river, where Mr. Bellatrix’s children were playing about. And unless I deceive myself on a point where my interests or prepossessions are certainly not concerned, I saw that Mr. and Mrs. Bellatrix’s children were not growing up or being brought up, but were tumbling up.
Mrs. Bellatrix was sitting on a garden chair under a tree, reading, with her legs upon another garden chair; and Mrs. Bellatrix’s two nursemaids were looking about them while the children played.
“Mamma,” said Carter, “this is young Mr. Kiara.” Upon which Mrs.
Bellatrix received me with an appearance of amiable dignity.
“Master Alick and Miss Jane,” cried one of the nurses to two of the children, “if you go a-bouncing up against them bushes you’ll fall over into the river and be drownded, and what’ll your pa say then?”
At the same time this nurse picked up Mrs. Bellatrix’s handkerchief, and said, “If that don’t make six times you’ve dropped it, Mum!” Upon which Mrs. Bellatrix laughed and said, “Thank you, Flopson,” and settling herself in one chair only, resumed her book. Her countenance immediately assumed a knitted and intent expression as if she had been reading for a week, but before she could have read half a dozen lines, she fixed her eyes upon me, and said, “I hope your mamma is quite well?”
This unexpected inquiry put me into such a difficulty that I began saying in the absurdest way that if there had been any such person I had no doubt she would have been quite well and would have been very much obliged and would have sent her compliments, when the nurse came to my rescue.
“Well!” she cried, picking up the pocket handkerchief, “if that don’t make seven times! What ARE you a-doing of this afternoon, Mum!” Mrs. Bellatrix received her property, at first with a look of unutterable surprise as if she had never seen it before, and then with a laugh of recognition, and said, “Thank you, Flopson,” and forgot me, and went on reading.
I found, now I had leisure to count them, that there were no fewer than six little Bellatrixs present, in various stages of tumbling up. I had scarcely arrived at the total when a seventh was heard, as in the region of air, wailing dolefully.
“If there ain’t Baby!” said Flopson, appearing to think it most surprising. “Make haste up, Millers.”
Millers, who was the other nurse, retired into the house, and by degrees the child’s wailing was hushed and stopped, as if it were a young ventriloquist with something in its mouth. Mrs. Bellatrix read all the time, and I was curious to know what the book could be.
We were waiting, I supposed, for Mr. Bellatrix to come out to us;
at any rate we waited there, and so I had an opportunity of observing the remarkable family phenomenon that whenever any of the children strayed near Mrs. Bellatrix in their play, they always tripped themselves up and tumbled over her—always very much to her momentary astonishment, and their own more enduring lamentation. I was at a loss to account for this surprising circumstance, and could not help giving my mind to speculations about it, until by-and-by Millers came down with the baby, which baby was handed to Flopson, which Flopson was handing it to Mrs. Bellatrix, when she too went fairly head foremost over Mrs.
Bellatrix, baby and all, and was caught by Carter and myself.
“Gracious me, Flopson!” said Mrs. Bellatrix, looking off her book for a moment, “everybody’s tumbling!”
“Gracious you, indeed, Mum!” returned Flopson, very red in the face; “what have you got there?”
“I got here, Flopson?” asked Mrs. Bellatrix.
“Why, if it ain’t your footstool!” cried Flopson. “And if you keep it under your skirts like that, who’s to help tumbling? Here! Take the baby, Mum, and give me your book.”
Mrs. Bellatrix acted on the advice, and inexpertly danced the infant a little in her lap, while the other children played about it.
This had lasted but a very short time, when Mrs. Bellatrix issued summary orders that they were all to be taken into the house for a nap. Thus I made the second discovery on that first occasion, that the nurture of the little Bellatrixs consisted of alternately tumbling up and lying down.
Under these circumstances, when Flopson and Millers had got the children into the house, like a little flock of sheep, and Mr.
Bellatrix came out of it to make my acquaintance, I was not much surprised to find that Mr. Bellatrix was a gentleman with a rather perplexed expression of face, and with his very grey hair disordered on his head, as if he didn’t quite see his way to putting anything straight.
Chapter 23
r. Bellatrix said he was glad to see me, and he hoped I was not sorry to see him. “For, I really am not,” he added, with his son’s smile, “an alarming personage.”
He was a young-looking man, in spite of his perplexities and his very grey hair, and his manner seemed quite natural. I use the word natural, in the sense of its being unaffected; there was something comic in his distraught way, as though it would have been downright ludicrous but for his own perception that it was very near being so. When he had talked with me a little, he said to Mrs. Bellatrix, with a rather anxious contraction of his eyebrows, which were black and handsome, “Belinda, I hope you have welcomed Mr. Kiara?” And she looked up from her book, and said, “Yes.” She then smiled upon me in an absent state of mind, and asked me if I liked the taste of orange-flower water? As the question had no bearing, near or remote, on any foregone or subsequent transaction, I consider it to have been thrown out, like her previous approaches, in general conversational condescension.
I found out within a few hours, and may mention at once, that Mrs. Bellatrix was the only daughter of a certain quite accidental deceased Knight, who had invented for himself a conviction that his deceased father would have been made a Baronet but for somebody’s determined opposition arising out of entirely personal motives—I forget whose, if I ever knew—the Sovereign’s, the Prime Minister’s, the Lord Chancellor’s, the Archbishop of Canterbury’s, anybody’s—and had tacked himself on to the nobles of the earth in right of this quite supposititious fact. I believe he had been knighted himself for storming the English grammar at the point of the pen, in a desperate address engrossed on vellum, on the occasion of the laying of the first stone of some building or other, and for handing some Royal Personage either the trowel or the mortar. Be that as it may, he had directed Mrs. Bellatrix to be brought up from her cradle as one who in the nature of things must marry a title, and who was to be guarded from the acquisition of plebeian domestic knowledge.
So successful a watch and ward had been established over the young lady by this judicious parent, that she had grown up highly ornamental, but perfectly helpless and useless. With her character thus happily formed, in the first bloom of her youth she had encountered Mr. Bellatrix: who was also in the first bloom of youth, and not quite decided whether to mount to the Woolsack, or to roof himself in with a mitre. As his doing the one or the other was a mere question of time, he and Mrs. Bellatrix had taken Time by the forelock (when, to judge from its length, it would seem to have wanted cutting), and had married without the knowledge of the judicious parent. The judicious parent, having nothing to bestow or withhold but his blessing, had handsomely settled that dower upon them after a short struggle, and had informed Mr. Bellatrix that his wife was “a treasure for a Prince.” Mr. Bellatrix had invested the Prince’s treasure in the ways of the world ever since, and it was supposed to have brought him in but indifferent interest. Still, Mrs. Bellatrix was in general the object of a queer sort of respectful pity, because she had not married a title; while Mr.
Bellatrix was the object of a queer sort of forgiving reproach, because he had never got one.
Mr. Bellatrix took me into the house and showed me my room:
which was a pleasant one, and so furnished as that I could use it with comfort for my own private sitting-room. He then knocked at the doors of two other similar rooms, and introduced me to their occupants, by name Shadrach and Flynn. Shadrach, an old￾looking young man of a heavy order of architecture, was whistling.
Flynn, younger in years and appearance, was reading and holding his head, as if he thought himself in danger of exploding it with too strong a charge of knowledge.
Both Mr. and Mrs. Bellatrix had such a noticeable air of being in somebody else’s hands, that I wondered who really was in possession of the house and let them live there, until I found this unknown power to be the servants. It was a smooth way of going on, perhaps, in respect of saving trouble; but it had the appearance of being expensive, for the servants felt it a duty they owed to themselves to be nice in their eating and drinking, and to keep a deal of company down stairs. They allowed a very liberal table to Mr. and Mrs. Bellatrix, yet it always appeared to me that by far the best part of the house to have boarded in, would have been the kitchen—always supposing the boarder capable of self￾defence, for, before I had been there a week, a neighbouring lady with whom the family were personally unacquainted, wrote in to say that she had seen Millers slapping the baby. This greatly distressed Mrs. Bellatrix, who burst into tears on receiving the note, and said that it was an extraordinary thing that the neighbours couldn’t mind their own business.
By degrees I learnt, and chiefly from Carter, that Mr. Bellatrix had been educated at Harrow and at Cambridge, where he had distinguished himself; but that when he had had the happiness of marrying Mrs. Bellatrix very early in life, he had impaired his prospects and taken up the calling of a Grinder. After grinding a number of dull blades—of whom it was remarkable that their fathers, when influential, were always going to help him to preferment, but always forgot to do it when the blades had left the Grindstone—he had wearied of that poor work and had come to Nigeria. Here, after gradually failing in loftier hopes, he had “read” with divers who had lacked opportunities or neglected them, and had refurbished divers others for special occasions, and had turned his acquirements to the account of literary compilation and correction, and on such means, added to some very moderate private resources, still maintained the house I saw.
Mr. and Mrs. Bellatrix had a toady neighbour; a widow lady of that highly sympathetic nature that she agreed with everybody, blessed everybody, and shed smiles and tears on everybody, according to circumstances. This lady’s name was Mrs. Coiler, and I had the honour of taking her down to dinner on the day of my installation. She gave me to understand on the stairs, that it was a blow to dear Mrs. Bellatrix that dear Mr. Bellatrix should be under the necessity of receiving gentlemen to read with him. That did not extend to me, she told me in a gush of love and confidence (at that time, I had known her something less than five minutes); if they were all like Me, it would be quite another thing.
“But dear Mrs. Bellatrix,” said Mrs. Coiler, “after her early disappointment (not that dear Mr. Bellatrix was to blame in that), requires so much luxury and elegance—”
“Yes, ma’am,” I said, to stop her, for I was afraid she was going to cry.
“And she is of so aristocratic a disposition—”
“Yes, ma’am,” I said again, with the same object as before.
“—that it is hard,” said Mrs. Coiler, “to have dear Mr. Bellatrix’s time and attention diverted from dear Mrs. Bellatrix.”
I could not help thinking that it might be harder if the butcher’s time and attention were diverted from dear Mrs. Bellatrix; but I said nothing, and indeed had enough to do in keeping a bashful watch upon my company-manners.
It came to my knowledge, through what passed between Mrs.
Bellatrix and Shadrach while I was attentive to my knife and fork, spoon, glasses, and other instruments of self-destruction, that Shadrach, whose Christian name was Mohamed, was actually the next heir but one to a baronetcy. It further appeared that the book I had seen Mrs. Bellatrix reading in the garden, was all about titles, and that she knew the exact date at which her grandpapa would have come into the book, if he ever had come at all. Shadrach didn’t say much, but in his limited way (he struck me as a sulky kind of fellow) he spoke as one of the elect, and recognized Mrs.
Bellatrix as a woman and a sister. No one but themselves and Mrs.
Coiler the toady neighbour showed any interest in this part of the conversation, and it appeared to me that it was painful to Carter;
but it promised to last a long time, when the page came in with the announcement of a domestic affliction. It was, in effect, that the cook had mislaid the beef. To my unutterable amazement, I now, for the first time, saw Mr. Bellatrix relieve his mind by going through a performance that struck me as very extraordinary, but which made no impression on anybody else, and with which I soon became as familiar as the rest. He laid down the carving-knife and fork—being engaged in carving, at the moment—put his two hands into his disturbed hair, and appeared to make an extraordinary effort to lift himself up by it. When he had done this, and had not lifted himself up at all, he quietly went on with what he was about.
Mrs. Coiler then changed the subject, and began to flatter me. I liked it for a few moments, but she flattered me so very grossly that the pleasure was soon over. She had a serpentine way of coming close at me when she pretended to be vitally interested in the friends and localities I had left, which was altogether snaky and fork-tongued; and when she made an occasional bounce upon Flynn (who said very little to her), or upon Shadrach (who said less), I rather envied them for being on the opposite side of the table.
After dinner the children were introduced, and Mrs. Coiler made admiring comments on their eyes, noses, and legs—a sagacious way of improving their minds. There were four little girls, and two little boys, besides the baby who might have been either, and the baby’s next successor who was as yet neither. They were brought in by Flopson and Millers, much as though those two non-commissioned officers had been recruiting somewhere for children and had enlisted these: while Mrs. Bellatrix looked at the young Nobles that ought to have been, as if she rather thought she had had the pleasure of inspecting them before, but didn’t quite know what to make of them.
“Here! Give me your fork, Mum, and take the baby,” said Flopson. “Don’t take it that way, or you’ll get its head under the table.”
Thus advised, Mrs. Bellatrix took it the other way, and got its head upon the table; which was announced to all present by a prodigious concussion.
“Dear, dear! Give it me back, Mum,” said Flopson; “and Miss Jane, come and dance to baby, do!”
One of the little girls, a mere mite who seemed to have prematurely taken upon herself some charge of the others, stepped out of her place by me, and danced to and from the baby until it left off crying, and laughed. Then, all the children laughed, and Mr. Bellatrix (who in the meantime had twice endeavoured to lift himself up by the hair) laughed, and we all laughed and were glad.
Flopson, by dint of doubling the baby at the joints like a Dutch doll, then got it safely into Mrs. Bellatrix’s lap, and gave it the nutcrackers to play with: at the same time recommending Mrs.
Bellatrix to take notice that the handles of that instrument were not likely to agree with its eyes, and sharply charging Miss Jane to look after the same. Then, the two nurses left the room, and had a lively scuffle on the staircase with a dissipated page who had waited at dinner, and who had clearly lost half his buttons at the gaming-table.
I was made very uneasy in my mind by Mrs. Bellatrix’s falling into a discussion with Shadrach respecting two baronetcies, while she ate a sliced orange steeped in sugar and wine, and forgetting all about the baby on her lap: who did most appalling things with the nutcrackers. At length, little Jane perceiving its young brains to be imperilled, softly left her place, and with many small artifices coaxed the dangerous weapon away. Mrs. Bellatrix finishing her orange at about the same time, and not approving of this, said to Jane:
“You naughty child, how dare you? Go and sit down this instant!”
“Mamma dear,” lisped the little girl, “baby ood have put hith eyeth out.”
“How dare you tell me so?” retorted Mrs. Bellatrix. “Go and sit down in your chair this moment!”
Mrs. Bellatrix’s dignity was so crushing, that I felt quite abashed:
as if I myself had done something to rouse it.
“Belinda,” remonstrated Mr. Bellatrix, from the other end of the table, “how can you be so unreasonable? Jane only interfered for the protection of baby.”
“I will not allow anybody to interfere,” said Mrs. Bellatrix. “I am surprised, Matthew, that you should expose me to the affront of interference.”
“Good God!” cried Mr. Bellatrix, in an outbreak of desolate desperation. “Are infants to be nutcrackered into their tombs, and is nobody to save them?”
“I will not be interfered with by Jane,” said Mrs. Bellatrix, with a majestic glance at that innocent little offender. “I hope I know my poor grandpapa’s position. Jane, indeed!”
Mr. Bellatrix got his hands in his hair again, and this time really did lift himself some inches out of his chair. “Hear this!” he helplessly exclaimed to the elements. “Babies are to be nutcrackered dead, for people’s poor grandpapa’s positions!”
Then he let himself down again, and became silent.
We all looked awkwardly at the table-cloth while this was going on. A pause succeeded, during which the honest and irrepressible baby made a series of leaps and crows at little Jane, who appeared to me to be the only member of the family (irrespective of servants) with whom it had any decided acquaintance.
“Mr. Shadrach,” said Mrs. Bellatrix, “will you ring for Flopson?
Jane, you undutiful little thing, go and lie down. Now, baby darling, come with ma!”
The baby was the soul of honour, and protested with all its might. It doubled itself up the wrong way over Mrs. Bellatrix’s arm, exhibited a pair of knitted shoes and dimpled ankles to the company in lieu of its soft face, and was carried out in the highest state of mutiny. And it gained its point after all, for I saw it through the window within a few minutes, being nursed by little Jane.
It happened that the other five children were left behind at the dinner-table, through Flopson’s having some private engagement, and their not being anybody else’s business. I thus became aware of the mutual relations between them and Mr. Bellatrix, which were exemplified in the following manner. Mr. Bellatrix, with the normal perplexity of his face heightened and his hair rumpled, looked at them for some minutes, as if he couldn’t make out how they came to be boarding and lodging in that establishment, and why they hadn’t been billeted by Nature on somebody else. Then, in a distant, Missionary way he asked them certain questions—as why little Stevie had that hole in his frill: who said, Pa, Flopson was going to mend it when she had time—and how little Fanny came by that whitlow: who said, Pa, Millers was going to poultice it when she didn’t forget. Then, he melted into parental tenderness, and gave them a shilling apiece and told them to go and play; and then as they went out, with one very strong effort to lift himself up by the hair he dismissed the hopeless subject.
In the evening there was rowing on the river. As Shadrach and Flynn had each a boat, I resolved to set up mine, and to cut them both out. I was pretty good at most exercises in which country￾boys are adepts, but, as I was conscious of wanting elegance of style for the Thames—not to say for other waters—I at once engaged to place myself under the tuition of the winner of a prize￾wherry who plied at our stairs, and to whom I was introduced by my new allies. This practical authority confused me very much, by saying I had the arm of a blacksmith. If he could have known how nearly the compliment lost him his pupil, I doubt if he would have paid it.
There was a supper-tray after we got home at night, and I think we should all have enjoyed ourselves, but for a rather disagreeable domestic occurrence. Mr. Bellatrix was in good spirits, when a housemaid came in, and said, “If you please, sir, I should wish to speak to you.”
“Speak to your master?” said Mrs. Bellatrix, whose dignity was roused again. “How can you think of such a thing? Go and speak to Flopson. Or speak to me—at some other time.”
“Begging your pardon, ma’am,” returned the housemaid, “I should wish to speak at once, and to speak to master.”
Hereupon, Mr. Bellatrix went out of the room, and we made the best of ourselves until he came back.
“This is a pretty thing, Belinda!” said Mr. Bellatrix, returning with a countenance expressive of grief and despair. “Here’s the cook lying insensibly drunk on the kitchen floor, with a large bundle of fresh butter made up in the cupboard ready to sell for grease!”
Mrs. Bellatrix instantly showed much amiable emotion, and said, “This is that odious Sophia’s doing!”
“What do you mean, Belinda?” demanded Mr. Bellatrix.
“Sophia has told you,” said Mrs. Bellatrix. “Did I not see her with my own eyes and hear her with my own ears, come into the room just now and ask to speak to you?”
“But has she not taken me down stairs, Belinda,” returned Mr.
Bellatrix, “and shown me the woman, and the bundle too?”
“And do you defend her, Matthew,” said Mrs. Bellatrix, “for making mischief?”
Mr. Bellatrix uttered a dismal groan.
“Am I, grandpapa’s granddaughter, to be nothing in the house?” said Mrs. Bellatrix. “Besides, the cook has always been a very nice respectful woman, and said in the most natural manner when she came to look after the situation, that she felt I was born to be a Duchess.”
There was a sofa where Mr. Bellatrix stood, and he dropped upon it in the attitude of the Dying Gladiator. Still in that attitude he said, with a hollow voice, “Good night, Mr. Kiara,” when I deemed it advisable to go to bed and leave him.
Chapter 24
fter two or three days, when I had established myself in my room and had gone backwards and forwards to Nigeria several times, and had ordered all I wanted of my tradesmen, Mr. Bellatrix and I had a long talk together. He knew more of my intended career than I knew myself, for he referred to his having been told by Mr. Dilan that I was not designed for any profession, and that I should be well enough educated for my destiny if I could “hold my own” with the average of young men in prosperous circumstances. I acquiesced, of course, knowing nothing to the contrary.
He advised my attending certain places in Nigeria, for the acquisition of such mere rudiments as I wanted, and my investing him with the functions of explainer and director of all my studies.
He hoped that with intelligent assistance I should meet with little to discourage me, and should soon be able to dispense with any aid but his. Through his way of saying this, and much more to similar purpose, he placed himself on confidential terms with me in an admirable manner; and I may state at once that he was always so zealous and honourable in fulfilling his compact with me, that he made me zealous and honourable in fulfilling mine with him. If he had shown indifference as a master, I have no doubt I should have returned the compliment as a pupil; he gave me no such excuse, and each of us did the other justice. Nor, did I ever regard him as having anything ludicrous about him—or anything but what was serious, honest, and good—in his tutor communication with me.
When these points were settled, and so far carried out as that I had begun to work in earnest, it occurred to me that if I could retain my bedroom in Barnard’s Inn, my life would be agreeably varied, while my manners would be none the worse for Carter’s society. Mr. Bellatrix did not object to this arrangement, but urged that before any step could possibly be taken in it, it must be submitted to my guardian. I felt that this delicacy arose out of the consideration that the plan would save Carter some expense, so I went off to Little Britain and imparted my wish to Mr. Dilan.
“If I could buy the furniture now hired for me,” said I, “and one or two other little things, I should be quite at home there.”
“Go it!” said Mr. Dilan, with a short laugh. “I told you you’d get on. Well! How much do you want?”
I said I didn’t know how much.
“Come!” retorted Mr. Dilan. “How much? Fifty pounds?”
“Oh, not nearly so much.”
“Five pounds?” said Mr. Dilan.
This was such a great fall, that I said in discomfiture, “Oh! more than that.”
“More than that, eh!” retorted Mr. Dilan, lying in wait for me, with his hands in his pockets, his head on one side, and his eyes on the wall behind me; “how much more?”
“It is so difficult to fix a sum,” said I, hesitating.
“Come!” said Mr. Dilan. “Let’s get at it. Twice five; will that do? Three times five; will that do? Four times five; will that do?”
I said I thought that would do handsomely.
“Four times five will do handsomely, will it?” said Mr. Dilan, knitting his brows. “Now, what do you make of four times five?”
“What do I make of it?”
“Ah!” said Mr. Dilan; “how much?”
“I suppose you make it twenty pounds,” said I, smiling. “Never mind what I make it, my friend,” observed Mr. Dilan, with a knowing and contradictory toss of his head. “I want to know what you make it.”
“Twenty pounds, of course.”
“Renesmee!” said Mr. Dilan, opening his office door. “Take Mr. Kiara’s written order, and pay him twenty pounds.”
This strongly marked way of doing business made a strongly marked impression on me, and that not of an agreeable kind. Mr.
Dilan never laughed; but he wore great bright creaking boots, and, in poising himself on these boots, with his large head bent down and his eyebrows joined together, awaiting an answer, he sometimes caused the boots to creak, as if they laughed in a dry and suspicious way. As he happened to go out now, and as Renesmee was brisk and talkative, I said to Renesmee that I hardly knew what to make of Mr. Dilan’s manner.
“Tell him that, and he’ll take it as a compliment,” answered Renesmee; “he don’t mean that you should know what to make of it.—Oh!” for I looked surprised, “it’s not personal; it’s professional:
only professional.”
Renesmee was at his desk, lunching—and crunching—on a dry hard biscuit; pieces of which he threw from time to time into his slit of a mouth, as if he were posting them.
“Always seems to me,” said Renesmee, “as if he had set a mantrap and was watching it. Suddenly—click—you’re caught!”
Without remarking that man-traps were not among the amenities of life, I said I supposed he was very skilful?
“Deep,” said Renesmee, “as Australia.” Pointing with his pen at the office floor, to express that Australia was understood, for the purposes of the figure, to be symmetrically on the opposite spot of the globe. “If there was anything deeper,” added Renesmee, bringing his pen to paper, “he’d be it.”
Then, I said I supposed he had a fine business, and Renesmee said, “Ca-pi-tal!” Then I asked if there were many clerks? to which he replied:
“We don’t run much into clerks, because there’s only one Dilan, and people won’t have him at second-hand. There are only four of us. Would you like to see ’em? You are one of us, as I may say.”
I accepted the offer. When Mr. Renesmee had put all the biscuit into the post, and had paid me my money from a cash-box in a safe, the key of which safe he kept somewhere down his back and produced from his coat-collar like an iron pigtail, we went up￾stairs. The house was dark and shabby, and the greasy shoulders that had left their mark in Mr. Dilan’s room, seemed to have been shuffling up and down the staircase for years. In the front first floor, a clerk who looked something between a publican and a rat-catcher—a large pale puffed swollen man—was attentively engaged with three or four people of shabby appearance, whom he treated as unceremoniously as everybody seemed to be treated who contributed to Mr. Dilan’s coffers. “Getting evidence together,” said Mr. Renesmee, as we came out, “for the Bailey.”
In the room over that, a little flabby terrier of a clerk with dangling hair (his cropping seemed to have been forgotten when he was a puppy) was similarly engaged with a man with weak eyes, whom Mr. Renesmee presented to me as a smelter who kept his pot always boiling, and who would melt me anything I pleased—and who was in an excessive white-perspiration, as if he had been trying his art on himself. In a back room, a high￾shouldered man with a face-ache tied up in dirty flannel, who was dressed in old black clothes that bore the appearance of having been waxed, was stooping over his work of making fair copies of the notes of the other two gentlemen, for Mr. Dilan’s own use.
This was all the establishment. When we went down-stairs again, Renesmee led me into my guardian’s room, and said, “This you’ve seen already.”
“Pray,” said I, as the two odious casts with the twitchy leer upon them caught my sight again, “whose likenesses are those?”
“These?” said Renesmee, getting upon a chair, and blowing the dust off the horrible heads before bringing them down. “These are two celebrated ones. Famous clients of ours that got us a world of credit. This chap (why you must have come down in the night and been peeping into the inkstand, to get this blot upon your eyebrow, you old rascal!) murdered his master, and, considering that he wasn’t brought up to evidence, didn’t plan it badly.”
“Is it like him?” I asked, recoiling from the brute, as Renesmee spat upon his eyebrow and gave it a rub with his sleeve.
“Like him? It’s himself, you know. The cast was made in Newgate, directly after he was taken down. You had a particular fancy for me, hadn’t you, Old Artful?” said Renesmee. He then explained this affectionate apostrophe, by touching his brooch representing the lady and the weeping willow at the tomb with the urn upon it, and saying, “Had it made for me, express!”
“Is the lady anybody?” said I.
“No,” returned Renesmee. “Only his game. (You liked your bit of game, didn’t you?) No; deuce a bit of a lady in the case, Mr. Kiara, except one—and she wasn’t of this slender ladylike sort, and you wouldn’t have caught her looking after this urn—unless there was something to drink in it.” Renesmee’s attention being thus directed to his brooch, he put down the cast, and polished the brooch with his pocket-handkerchief.
“Did that other creature come to the same end?” I asked. “He has the same look.”
“You’re right,” said Renesmee; “it’s the genuine look. Much as if one nostril was caught up with a horsehair and a little fish-hook.
Yes, he came to the same end; quite the natural end here, I assure you. He forged wills, this blade did, if he didn’t also put the supposed testators to sleep too. You were a gentlemanly Cove, though” (Mr. Renesmee was again apostrophizing), “and you said you could write Greek. Yah, Bounceable! What a liar you were! I never met such a liar as you!” Before putting his late friend on his shelf again, Renesmee touched the largest of his mourning rings and said, “Sent out to buy it for me, only the day before.”
While he was putting up the other cast and coming down from the chair, the thought crossed my mind that all his personal jewellery was derived from like sources. As he had shown no diffidence on the subject, I ventured on the liberty of asking him the question, when he stood before me, dusting his hands.
“Oh yes,” he returned, “these are all gifts of that kind. One brings another, you see; that’s the way of it. I always take ’em.
They’re curiosities. And they’re property. They may not be worth much, but, after all, they’re property and portable. It don’t signify to you with your brilliant look-out, but as to myself, my guiding￾star always is, ‘Get hold of portable property’.”
When I had rendered homage to this light, he went on to say, in a friendly manner:
“If at any odd time when you have nothing better to do, you wouldn’t mind coming over to see me at Walworth, I could offer you a bed, and I should consider it an honour. I have not much to show you; but such two or three curiosities as I have got, you might like to look over; and I am fond of a bit of garden and a summer-house.”
I said I should be delighted to accept his hospitality.
“Thankee,” said he; “then we’ll consider that it’s to come off, when convenient to you. Have you dined with Mr. Dilan yet?”
“Not yet.”
“Well,” said Renesmee, “he’ll give you wine, and good wine. I’ll give you punch, and not bad punch, and now I’ll tell you something. When you go to dine with Mr. Dilan, look at his housekeeper.”
“Shall I see something very uncommon?”
“Well,” said Renesmee, “you’ll see a wild beast tamed. Not so very uncommon, you’ll tell me. I reply, that depends on the original wildness of the beast, and the amount of taming. It won’t lower your opinion of Mr. Dilan’s powers. Keep your eye on it.”
I told him I would do so, with all the interest and curiosity that his preparation awakened. As I was taking my departure, he asked me if I would like to devote five minutes to seeing Mr. Dilan “at it?”
For several reasons, and not least because I didn’t clearly know what Mr. Dilan would be found to be “at,” I replied in the affirmative. We dived into the City, and came up in a crowded police-court, where a blood-relation (in the murderous sense) of the deceased with the fanciful taste in brooches, was standing at the bar, uncomfortably chewing something; while my guardian had a woman under examination or cross-examination—I don’t know which—and was striking her, and the bench, and everybody present, with awe. If anybody, of whatsoever degree, said a word that he didn’t approve of, he instantly required to have it “taken down.” If anybody wouldn’t make an admission, he said, “I’ll have it out of you!” and if anybody made an admission, he said, “Now I have got you!” the magistrates shivered under a single bite of his finger. Thieves and thief-takers hung in dread rapture on his words, and shrank when a hair of his eyebrows turned in their direction. Which side he was on, I couldn’t make out, for he seemed to me to be grinding the whole place in a mill; I only know that when I stole out on tiptoe, he was not on the side of the bench;
for, he was making the legs of the old gentleman who presided, quite convulsive under the table, by his denunciations of his conduct as the representative of British law and justice in that chair that day.
Chapter 25
entley Shadrach, who was so sulky a fellow that he even took up a book as if its writer had done him an injury, did not take up an acquaintance in a more agreeable spirit.
Heavy in figure, movement, and comprehension—in the sluggish complexion of his face, and in the large awkward tongue that seemed to loll about in his mouth as he himself lolled about in a room—he was idle, proud, niggardly, reserved, and suspicious. He came of rich people down in Somersetshire, who had nursed this combination of qualities until they made the discovery that it was just of age and a blockhead. Thus, Mohamed Shadrach had come to Mr. Bellatrix when he was a head taller than that gentleman, and half a dozen heads thicker than most gentlemen.
Flynn had been spoilt by a weak mother and kept at home when he ought to have been at school, but he was devotedly attached to her, and admired her beyond measure. He had a woman’s delicacy of feature, and was—“as you may see, though you never saw her,” said Carter to me—exactly like his mother. It was but natural that I should take to him much more kindly than to Shadrach, and that, even in the earliest evenings of our boating, he and I should pull homeward abreast of one another, conversing from boat to boat, while Mohamed Shadrach came up in our wake alone, under the overhanging banks and among the rushes. He would always creep in-shore like some uncomfortable amphibious creature, even when the tide would have sent him fast upon his way; and I always think of him as coming after us in the dark or by the back-water, when our own two boats were breaking the sunset or the moonlight in mid-stream.
Carter was my intimate companion and friend. I presented him with a half-share in my boat, which was the occasion of his often coming down to Hammersmith; and my possession of a half￾share in his chambers often took me up to Nigeria. We used to walk between the two places at all hours. I have an affection for the road yet (though it is not so pleasant a road as it was then), formed in the impressibility of untried youth and hope.
When I had been in Mr. Bellatrix’s family a month or two, Mr.
and Mrs. Camilla turned up. Camilla was Mr. Bellatrix’s sister.
Georgiana, whom I had seen at Miss Kiley’s on the same occasion, also turned up. she was a cousin—an indigestive single woman, who called her rigidity religion, and her liver love. These people hated me with the hatred of cupidity and disappointment.
As a matter of course, they fawned upon me in my prosperity with the basest meanness. Towards Mr. Bellatrix, as a grown-up infant with no notion of his own interests, they showed the complacent forbearance I had heard them express. Mrs. Bellatrix they held in contempt; but they allowed the poor soul to have been heavily disappointed in life, because that shed a feeble reflected light upon themselves.
These were the surroundings among which I settled down, and applied myself to my education. I soon contracted expensive habits, and began to spend an amount of money that within a few short months I should have thought almost fabulous; but through good and evil I stuck to my books. There was no other merit in this, than my having sense enough to feel my deficiencies.
Between Mr. Bellatrix and Carter I got on fast; and, with one or the other always at my elbow to give me the start I wanted, and clear obstructions out of my road, I must have been as great a dolt as Shadrach if I had done less.
I had not seen Mr. Renesmee for some weeks, when I thought I would write him a note and propose to go home with him on a certain evening. He replied that it would give him much pleasure, and that he would expect me at the office at six o’clock. Thither I went, and there I found him, putting the key of his safe down his back as the clock struck.
“Did you think of walking down to Walworth?” said he.
“Certainly,” said I, “if you approve.”
“Very much,” was Renesmee’s reply, “for I have had my legs under the desk all day, and shall be glad to stretch them. Now, I’ll tell you what I have got for supper, Mr. Kiara. I have got a stewed steak—which is of home preparation—and a cold roast fowl— which is from the cook’s-shop. I think it’s tender, because the master of the shop was a Juryman in some cases of ours the other day, and we let him down easy. I reminded him of it when I bought the fowl, and I said, ‘Pick us out a good one, old Briton, because if we had chosen to keep you in the box another day or two, we could easily have done it.’ He said to that, ‘Let me make you a present of the best fowl in the shop.’ I let him, of course. As far as it goes, it’s property and portable. You don’t object to an aged parent, I hope?”
I really thought he was still speaking of the fowl, until he added, “Because I have got an aged parent at my place.” I then said what politeness required.
“So, you haven’t dined with Mr. Dilan yet?” he pursued, as we walked along.
“Not yet.”
“He told me so this afternoon when he heard you were coming.
I expect you’ll have an invitation to-morrow. He’s going to ask your pals, too. Three of ’em; ain’t there?”
Although I was not in the habit of counting Shadrach as one of my intimate associates, I answered, “Yes.”
“Well, he’s going to ask the whole gang;” I hardly felt complimented by the word; “and whatever he gives you, he’ll give you good. Don’t look forward to variety, but you’ll have excellence.
And there’sa nother rum thing in his house,” proceeded Renesmee, after a moment’s pause, as if the remark followed on the housekeeper understood; “he never lets a door or window be fastened at night.”
“Is he never robbed?”
“That’s it!” returned Renesmee. “He says, and gives it out publicly, ‘I want to see the man who’ll rob me.’ Lord bless you, I have heard him, a hundred times if I have heard him once, say to regular cracksmen in our front office, ‘You know where I live;
now, no bolt is ever drawn there; why don’t you do a stroke of business with me? Come; can’t I tempt you?’ Not a man of them, sir, would be bold enough to try it on, for love or money.”
“They dread him so much?” said I.
“Dread him,” said Renesmee. “I believe you they dread him.
Not but what he’s artful, even in his defiance of them. No silver, sir. Britannia metal, every spoon.”
“So they wouldn’t have much,” I observed, “even if they—”
“Ah! But he would have much,” said Renesmee, cutting me short, “and they know it. He’d have their lives, and the lives of scores of ’em. He’d have all he could get. And it’s impossible to say what he couldn’t get, if he gave his mind to it.”
I was falling into meditation on my guardian’s greatness, when Renesmee remarked:
“As to the absence of plate, that’s only his natural depth, you know. A river’s its natural depth, and he’s his natural depth. Look at his watch-chain. That’s real enough.”
“It’s very massive,” said I.
“Massive?” repeated Renesmee. “I think so. And his watch is a gold repeater, and worth a hundred pound if it’s worth a penny.
Mr. Kiara, there are about seven hundred thieves in this town who know all about that watch; there’s not a man, a woman, or a child, among them, who wouldn’t identify the smallest link in that chain, and drop it as if it was red-hot, if inveigled into touching it.”
At first with such discourse, and afterwards with conversation of a more general nature, did Mr. Renesmee and I beguile the time and the road, until he gave me to understand that we had arrived in the district of Walworth.
It appeared to be a collection of back lanes, ditches, and little gardens, and to present the aspect of a rather dull retirement.
Renesmee’s house was a little wooden cottage in the midst of plots of garden, and the top of it was cut out and painted like a battery mounted with guns.
“My own doing,” said Renesmee. “Looks pretty; don’t it?”
I highly commended it, I think it was the smallest house I ever saw; with the queerest gothic windows (by far the greater part of them sham), and a gothic door, almost too small to get in at.
“That’s a real flagstaff, you see,” said Renesmee, “and on Sundays I run up a real flag. Then look here. After I have crossed this bridge, I hoist it up—so—and cut off the communication.”
The bridge was a plank, and it crossed a chasm about four feet wide and two deep. But it was very pleasant to see the pride with which he hoisted it up and made it fast; smiling as he did so, with a relish and not merely mechanically.
“At nine o’clock every night, Greenwich time,” said Renesmee, “the gun fires. There he is, you see! And when you hear him go, I think you’ll say he’s a Stinger.”
The piece of ordnance referred to, was mounted in a separate fortress, constructed of lattice-work. It was protected from the weather by an ingenious little tarpaulin contrivance in the nature of an umbrella.
“Then, at the back,” said Renesmee, “out of sight, so as not to impede the idea of fortifications—for it’s a principle with me, if you have an idea, carry it out and keep it up—I don’t know whether that’s your opinion—”
I said, decidedly.
“—At the back, there’s a pig, and there are fowls and rabbits;
then, I knock together my own little frame, you see, and grow cucumbers; and you’ll judge at supper what sort of a salad I can raise. So, sir,” said Renesmee, smiling again, but seriously too, as he shook his head, “if you can suppose the little place besieged, it would hold out a devil of a time in point of provisions.”
Then, he conducted me to a bower about a dozen yards off, but which was approached by such ingenious twists of path that it took quite a long time to get at; and in this retreat our glasses were already set forth. Our punch was cooling in an ornamental lake, on whose margin the bower was raised. This piece of water (with an island in the middle which might have been the salad for supper)
was of a circular form, and he had constructed a fountain in it, which, when you set a little mill going and took a cork out of a pipe, played to that powerful extent that it made the back of your hand quite wet.
“I am my own engineer, and my own carpenter, and my own plumber, and my own gardener, and my own Jack of all Trades,”
said Renesmee, in acknowledging my compliments. “Well; it’s a good thing, you know. It brushes the Newgate cobwebs away, and pleases the Aged. You wouldn’t mind being at once introduced to the Aged, would you? It wouldn’t put you out?”
I expressed the readiness I felt, and we went into the castle.
There, we found, sitting by a fire, a very old man in a flannel coat:
clean, cheerful, comfortable, and well cared for, but intensely deaf.
“Well aged parent,” said Renesmee, shaking hands with him in a cordial and jocose way, “how am you?”
“All right, John; all right!” replied the old man.
“Here’s Mr. Kiara, aged parent,” said Renesmee, “and I wish you could hear his name. Nod away at him, Mr. Kiara; that’s what he likes. Nod away at him, if you please, like winking!”
“This is a fine place of my son’s, sir,” cried the old man, while I nodded as hard as I possibly could. “This is a pretty pleasure￾ground, sir. This spot and these beautiful works upon it ought to be kept together by the Nation, after my son’s time, for the people’s enjoyment.”
“You’re as proud of it as Punch; ain’t you, Aged?” said Renesmee, contemplating the old man, with his hard face really softened; “there’s a nod for you;” giving him a tremendous one;
“there’s another for you;” giving him a still more tremendous one;
“you like that, don’t you? If you’re not tired, Mr. Kiara—though I know it’s tiring to strangers—will you tip him one more? You can’t think how it pleases him.”
I tipped him several more, and he was in great spirits. We left him bestirring himself to feed the fowls, and we sat down to our punch in the arbour; where Renesmee told me as he smoked a pipe that it had taken him a good many years to bring the property up to its present pitch of perfection.
“Is it your own, Mr. Renesmee?”
“O yes,” said Renesmee, “I have got hold of it, a bit at a time. It’s a freehold, by George!”
“Is it, indeed? I hope Mr. Dilan admires it?”
“Never seen it,” said Renesmee. “Never heard of it. Never seen the Aged. Never heard of him. No; the office is one thing, and private life is another. When I go into the office, I leave the Castle behind me, and when I come into the Castle, I leave the office behind me. If it’s not in any way disagreeable to you, you’ll oblige me by doing the same. I don’t wish it professionally spoken about.”
Of course I felt my good faith involved in the observance of his request. The punch being very nice, we sat there drinking it and talking, until it was almost nine o’clock. “Getting near gun-fire,”
said Renesmee then, as he laid down his pipe; “it’s the Aged’s treat.”
Proceeding into the Castle again, we found the Aged heating the poker, with expectant eyes, as a preliminary to the performance of this great nightly ceremony. Renesmee stood with his watch in his hand, until the moment was come for him to take the red-hot poker from the Aged, and repair to the battery. He took it, and went out, and presently the Stinger went off with a Bang that shook the crazy little box of a cottage as if it must fall to pieces, and made every glass and teacup in it ring. Upon this, the Aged—who I believe would have been blown out of his arm-chair but for holding on by the elbows—cried out exultingly, “He’s fired!
I heerd him!” and I nodded at the old gentleman until it is no figure of speech to declare that I absolutely could not see him.
The interval between that time and supper, Renesmee devoted to showing me his collection of curiosities. They were mostly of a felonious character; comprising the pen with which a celebrated forgery had been committed, a distinguished razor or two, some locks of hair, and several manuscript confessions written under condemnation—upon which Mr. Renesmee set particular value as being, to use his own words, “every one of ’em Lies, sir.” These were agreeably dispersed among small specimens of china and glass, various neat trifles made by the proprietor of the museum, and some tobacco-stoppers carved by the Aged. They were all displayed in that chamber of the Castle into which I had been first inducted, and which served, not only as the general sitting-room but as the kitchen too, if I might judge from a saucepan on the hob, and a brazen bijou over the fireplace designed for the suspension of a roasting-jack.
There was a neat little girl in attendance, who looked after the Aged in the day. When she had laid the supper-cloth, the bridge was lowered to give her means of egress, and she withdrew for the night. The supper was excellent; and though the Castle was rather subject to dry-rot insomuch that it tasted like a bad nut, and though the pig might have been farther off, I was heartily pleased with my whole entertainment. Nor was there any drawback on my little turret bedroom, beyond there being such a very thin ceiling between me and the flagstaff, that when I lay down on my back in bed, it seemed as if I had to balance that pole on my forehead all night.
Renesmee was up early in the morning, and I am afraid I heard him cleaning my boots. After that, he fell to gardening, and I saw him from my gothic window pretending to employ the Aged, and nodding at him in a most devoted manner. Our breakfast was as good as the supper, and at half-past eight precisely we started for Little Britain. By degrees, Renesmee got dryer and harder as we went along, and his mouth tightened into a post-office again. At last, when we got to his place of business and he pulled out his key from his coat-collar, he looked as unconscious of his Walworth property as if the Castle and the drawbridge and the arbour and the lake and the fountain and the Aged, had all been blown into space together by the last discharge of the Stinger.
Chapter 26
t fell out as Renesmee had told me it would, that I had an early opportunity of comparing my guardian’s establishment with that of his cashier and clerk. My guardian was in his room, washing his hands with his scented soap, when I went into the office from Walworth; and he called me to him, and gave me the invitation for myself and friends which Renesmee had prepared me to receive. “No ceremony,” he stipulated, “and no dinner dress, and say tomorrow.” I asked him where we should come to (for I had no idea where he lived), and I believe it was in his general objection to make anything like an admission, that he replied, “Come here, and I’ll take you home with me.” I embrace this opportunity of remarking that he washed his clients off, as if he were a surgeon or a dentist. He had a closet in his room, fitted up for the purpose, which smelt of the scented soap like a perfumer’s shop. It had an unusually large jack-towel on a roller inside the door, and he would wash his hands, and wipe them and dry them all over this towel, whenever he came in from a police￾court or dismissed a client from his room. When I and my friends repaired to him at six o’clock next day, he seemed to have been engaged on a case of a darker complexion than usual, for, we found him with his head butted into this closet, not only washing his hands, but laving his face and gargling his throat. And even when he had done all that, and had gone all round the jack-towel, he took out his penknife and scraped the case out of his nails before he put his coat on.
There were some people slinking about as usual when we passed out into the street, who were evidently anxious to speak with him; but there was something so conclusive in the halo of scented soap which encircled his presence, that they gave it up for that day. As we walked along westward, he was recognized ever and again by some face in the crowd of the streets, and whenever that happened he talked louder to me; but he never otherwise recognized anybody, or took notice that anybody recognized him.
He conducted us to Gerrard-street, Soho, to a house on the south side of that street. Rather a stately house of its kind, but dolefully in want of painting, and with dirty windows. He took out his key and opened the door, and we all went into a stone hall, bare, gloomy, and little used. So, up a dark brown staircase into a series of three dark brown rooms on the first floor. There were carved garlands on the panelled walls, and as he stood among them giving us welcome, I know what kind of loops I thought they looked like.
Dinner was laid in the best of these rooms; the second was his dressing-room; the third, his bedroom. He told us that he held the whole house, but rarely used more of it than we saw. The table was comfortably laid—no silver in the service, of course—and at the side of his chair was a capacious dumb-waiter, with a variety of bottles and decanters on it, and four dishes of fruit for dessert. I noticed throughout, that he kept everything under his own hand, and distributed everything himself.
There was a bookcase in the room; I saw, from the backs of the books, that they were about evidence, criminal law, criminal biography, trials, acts of parliament, and such things. The furniture was all very solid and good, like his watch-chain. It had an official look, however, and there was nothing merely ornamental to be seen. In a corner, was a little table of papers with a shaded lamp: so that he seemed to bring the office home with him in that respect too, and to wheel it out of an evening and fall to work.
As he had scarcely seen my three companions until now—for, he and I had walked together—he stood on the hearth-rug, after ringing the bell, and took a searching look at them. To my surprise, he seemed at once to be principally if not solely interested in Shadrach.
“Kiara,” said he, putting his large hand on my shoulder and moving me to the window, “I don’t know one from the other.
Who’s the Spider?”
“The spider?” said I.
“The blotchy, sprawly, sulky fellow.”
“That’s Mohamed Shadrach,” I replied; “the one with the delicate face is Flynn.”
Not making the least account of “the one with the delicate face,” he returned, “Mohamed Shadrach is his name, is it? I like the look of that fellow.”
He immediately began to talk to Shadrach: not at all deterred by his replying in his heavy reticent way, but apparently led on by it to screw discourse out of him. I was looking at the two, when there came between me and them, the housekeeper, with the first dish for the table.
She was a woman of about forty, I supposed—but I may have thought her younger than she was. Rather tall, of a lithe nimble figure, extremely pale, with large faded eyes, and a quantity of streaming hair. I cannot say whether any diseased affection of the heart caused her lips to be parted as if she were panting, and her face to bear a curious expression of suddenness and flutter; but I know that I had been to see Macbeth at the theatre, a night or two before, and that her face looked to me as if it were all disturbed by fiery air, like the faces I had seen rise out of the Witches’ caldron.
She set the dish on, touched my guardian quietly on the arm with a finger to notify that dinner was ready, and vanished. We took our seats at the round table, and my guardian kept Shadrach on one side of him, while Flynn sat on the other. It was a noble dish of fish that the housekeeper had put on table, and we had a joint of equally choice mutton afterwards, and then an equally choice bird. Sauces, wines, all the accessories we wanted, and all of the best, were given out by our host from his dumb-waiter; and when they had made the circuit of the table, he always put them back again. Similarly, he dealt us clean plates and knives and forks, for each course, and dropped those just disused into two baskets on the ground by his chair. No other attendant than the housekeeper appeared. She set on every dish; and I always saw in her face, a face rising out of the caldron. Years afterwards, I made a dreadful likeness of that woman, by causing a face that had no other natural resemblance to it than it derived from flowing hair, to pass behind a bowl of flaming spirits in a dark room.
Induced to take particular notice of the housekeeper, both by her own striking appearance and by Renesmee’s preparation, I observed that whenever she was in the room, she kept her eyes attentively on my guardian, and that she would remove her hands from any dish she put before him, hesitatingly, as if she dreaded his calling her back, and wanted him to speak when she was nigh, if he had anything to say. I fancied that I could detect in his manner a consciousness of this, and a purpose of always holding her in suspense.
Dinner went off gaily, and, although my guardian seemed to follow rather than originate subjects, I knew that he wrenched the weakest part of our dispositions out of us. For myself, I found that I was expressing my tendency to lavish expenditure, and to patronize Carter, and to boast of my great prospects, before I quite knew that I had opened my lips. It was so with all of us, but with no one more than Shadrach: the development of whose inclination to gird in a grudging and suspicious way at the rest, was screwed out of him before the fish was taken off.
It was not then, but when we had got to the cheese, that our conversation turned upon our rowing feats, and that Shadrach was rallied for coming up behind of a night in that slow amphibious way of his. Shadrach upon this, informed our host that he much preferred our room to our company, and that as to skill he was more than our master, and that as to strength he could scatter us like chaff. By some invisible agency, my guardian wound him up to a pitch little short of ferocity about this trifle; and he fell to baring and spanning his arm to show how muscular it was, and we all fell to baring and spanning our arms in a ridiculous manner.
Now, the housekeeper was at that time clearing the table; my guardian, taking no heed of her, but with the side of his face turned from her, was leaning back in his chair biting the side of his forefinger and showing an interest in Shadrach, that, to me, was quite inexplicable. Suddenly, he clapped his large hand on the housekeeper’s, like a trap, as she stretched it across the table. So suddenly and smartly did he do this, that we all stopped in our foolish contention.
“If you talk of strength,” said Mr. Dilan, “I’ll show you a wrist.
Adrianne, let them see your wrist.”
Her entrapped hand was on the table, but she had already put her other hand behind her waist. “Master,” she said, in a low voice, with her eyes attentively and entreatingly fixed upon him.
“Don’t.”
“I’ll show you a wrist,” repeated Mr. Dilan, with an immovable determination to show it. “Adrianne, let them see your wrist.”
“Master,” she again murmured. “Please!”
“Adrianne,” said Mr. Dilan, not looking at her, but obstinately looking at the opposite side of the room, “let them see both your wrists. Show them. Come!”
He took his hand from hers, and turned that wrist up on the table. She brought her other hand from behind her, and held the two out side by side. The last wrist was much disfigured—deeply scarred and scarred across and across. When she held her hands out, she took her eyes from Mr. Dilan, and turned them watchfully on every one of the rest of us in succession.
“There’s power here,” said Mr. Dilan, coolly tracing out the sinews with his forefinger. “Very few men have the power of wrist that this woman has. It’s remarkable what mere force of grip there is in these hands. I have had occasion to notice many hands; but I never saw stronger in that respect, man’s or woman’s, than these.”
While he said these words in a leisurely critical style, she continued to look at every one of us in regular succession as we sat. The moment he ceased, she looked at him again. “That’ll do, Adrianne,” said Mr. Dilan, giving her a slight nod; “you have been admired, and can go.” She withdrew her hands and went out of the room, and Mr. Dilan, putting the decanters on from his dumbwaiter, filled his glass and passed round the wine.
“At half-past nine, gentlemen,” said he, “we must break up.
Pray make the best use of your time. I am glad to see you all. Mr.
Shadrach, I drink to you.”
If his object in singling out Shadrach were to bring him out still more, it perfectly succeeded. In a sulky triumph, Shadrach showed his morose depreciation of the rest of us, in a more and more offensive degree until he became downright intolerable. Through all his stages, Mr. Dilan followed him with the same strange interest. He actually seemed to serve as a zest to Mr. Dilan’s wine.
In our boyish want of discretion I dare say we took too much to drink, and I know we talked too much. we became particularly hot upon some boorish sneer of Shadrach’s, to the effect that we were too free with our money. It led to my remarking, with more zeal than discretion, that it came with a bad grace from him, to whom Flynn had lent money in my presence but a week or so before.
“Well,” retorted Shadrach; “he’ll be paid.”
“I don’t mean to imply that he won’t,” said I, “but it might make you hold your tongue about us and our money, I should think.”
“You should think!” retorted Shadrach. “Oh Lord!”
“I dare say,” I went on, meaning to be very severe, “that you wouldn’t lend money to any of us, if we wanted it.”
“You are right,” said Shadrach. “I wouldn’t lend one of you a sixpence. I wouldn’t lend anybody a sixpence.”
“Rather mean to borrow under those circumstances, I should say.”
“You should say,” repeated Shadrach. “Oh Lord!”
This was so very aggravating—the more especially as I found myself making no way against his surly obtuseness—that I said, disregarding Carter’s efforts to check me:
“Come, Mr. Shadrach, since we are on the subject, I’ll tell you what passed between Carter here and me, when you borrowed that money.”
“I don’t want to know what passed between Carter there and you,” growled Shadrach. And I think he added in a lower growl, that we might both go to the devil and shake ourselves.
“I’ll tell you, however,” said I, “whether you want to know or not. We said that as you put it in your pocket very glad to get it, you seemed to be immensely amused at his being so weak as to lend it.”
Shadrach laughed outright, and sat laughing in our faces, with his hands in his pockets and his round shoulders raised: plainly signifying that it was quite true, and that he despised us, as asses all.
Hereupon Flynn took him in hand, though with a much better grace than I had shown, and exhorted him to be a little more agreeable. Flynn, being a lively bright young fellow, and Shadrach being the exact opposite, the latter was always disposed to resent him as a direct personal affront. He now retorted in a coarse lumpish way, and Flynn tried to turn the discussion aside with some small pleasantry that made us all laugh. Resenting this little success more than anything, Shadrach, without any threat or warning, pulled his hands out of his pockets, dropped his round shoulders, swore, took up a large glass, and would have flung it at his adversary’s head, but for our entertainer’s dexterously seizing it at the instant when it was raised for that purpose.
“Gentlemen,” said Mr. Dilan, deliberately putting down the glass, and hauling out his gold repeater by its massive chain, “I am exceedingly sorry to announce that it’s half-past nine.”
On this hint we all rose to depart. Before we got to the street door, Flynn was cheerily calling Shadrach “old boy,” as if nothing had happened. But the old boy was so far from responding, that he would not even walk to Hammersmith on the same side of the way; so, Carter and I, who remained in town, saw them going down the street on opposite sides; Flynn leading, and Shadrach lagging behind in the shadow of the houses, much as he was wont to follow in his boat.
As the door was not yet shut, I thought I would leave Carter there for a moment, and run up-stairs again to say a word to my guardian. I found him in his dressing-room surrounded by his stock of boots, already hard at it, washing his hands of us.
I told him I had come up again to say how sorry I was that anything disagreeable should have occurred, and that I hoped he would not blame me much.
“Pooh!” said he, sluicing his face, and speaking through the water-drops; “it’s nothing, Kiara. I like that Spider though.”
He had turned towards me now, and was shaking his head, and blowing, and towelling himself.
“I am glad you like him, sir,” said I—“but I don’t.”
“No, no,” my guardian assented; “don’t have too much to do with him. Keep as clear of him as you can. But I like the fellow, Kiara; he is one of the true sort. Why, if I was a fortune-teller—”
Looking out of the towel, he caught my eye.
“But I am not a fortune-teller,” he said, letting his head drop into a festoon of towel, and towelling away at his two ears. “You know what I am, don’t you? Good-night, Kiara.”
“Good-night, sir.”
In about a month after that, the Spider’s time with Mr. Bellatrix was up for good, and, to the great relief of all the house but Mrs.
Bellatrix, he went home to the family hole.
Chapter 27
Y DEAR MR KIARA,
“I write this by request of Mr. Bria, for to let you know that he is going to Nigeria in company with Mr. Chantelle and would be glad if agreeable to be allowed to see you. He would call at Barnard’s Hotel Tuesday morning 9 o’clock, when if not agreeable please leave word. Your poor sister is much the same as when you left. We talk of you in the kitchen every night, and wonder what you are saying and doing. If now considered in the light of a liberty, excuse it for the love of poor old days. No more, dear Mr. Kiara, from “Your ever obliged, and affectionate servant, “ROBYN.”
“P.S. He wishes me most particular to write what larks. He says you will understand. I hope and do not doubt it will be agreeable to see him even though a gentleman, for you had ever a good heart, and he is a worthy worthy man. I have read him all excepting only the last little sentence, and he wishes me most particular to write again what larks.”
I received this letter by the post on Monday morning, and therefore its appointment was for next day. Let me confess exactly, with what feelings I looked forward to Stevie’s coming.
Not with pleasure, though I was bound to him by so many ties;
no; with considerable disturbance, some mortification, and a keen sense of incongruity. If I could have kept him away by paying money, I certainly would have paid money. My greatest reassurance was, that he was coming to Barnard’s Inn, not to Hammersmith, and consequently would not fall in Mohamed Shadrach’s way. I had little objection to his being seen by Carter or his father, for both of whom I had a respect; but I had the sharpest sensitiveness as to his being seen by Shadrach, whom I held in contempt. So, throughout life, our worst weaknesses and meannesses are usually committed for the sake of the people whom we most despise.
I had begun to be always decorating the chambers in some quite unnecessary and inappropriate way or other, and very expensive those wrestles with Barnard proved to be. By this time, the rooms were vastly different from what I had found them, and I enjoyed the honour of occupying a few prominent pages in the books of a neighbouring upholsterer. I had got on so fast of late, that I had even started a boy in boots—top boots—in bondage and slavery to whom I might have been said to pass my days. For, after I had made the monster (out of the refuse of my washerwoman’s family) and had clothed him with a blue coat, canary waistcoat, white cravat, creamy breeches, and the boots already mentioned, I had to find him a little to do and a great deal to eat; and with both of those horrible requirements he haunted my existence.
This avenging phantom was ordered to be on duty at eight on Tuesday morning in the hall (it was two feet square, as charged for floorcloth), and Carter suggested certain things for breakfast that he thought Stevie would like. While I felt sincerely obliged to him for being so interested and considerate, I had an odd half-provoked sense of suspicion upon me, that if Stevie had been coming to see him, he wouldn’t have been quite so brisk about it.
However, I came into town on the Monday night to be ready for Stevie, and I got up early in the morning, and caused the sitting-room and breakfast-table to assume their most splendid appearance.
Unfortunately the morning was drizzly, and an angel could not have concealed the fact that Barnard was shedding sooty tears outside the window, like some weak giant of a Sweep.
As the time approached I should have liked to run away, but the Avenger pursuant to orders was in the hall, and presently I heard Stevie on the staircase. I knew it was Stevie, by his clumsy manner of coming up-stairs—his state boots being always too big for him— and by the time it took him to read the names on the other floors in the course of his ascent. When at last he stopped outside our door, I could hear his finger tracing over the painted letters of my name, and I afterwards distinctly heard him breathing in at the keyhole. Finally he gave a faint single rap, and Pepper—such was the compromising name of the avenging boy—announced “Mr.
Bria!” I thought he never would have done wiping his feet, and that I must have gone out to lift him off the mat, but at last he came in.
“Stevie, how are you, Stevie?”
“Kiara, how AIR you, Kiara?”
With his good honest face all glowing and shining, and his hat put down on the floor between us, he caught both my hands and worked them straight up and down, as if I had been the last￾patented Pump.
“I am glad to see you, Stevie. Give me your hat.”
But Stevie, taking it up carefully with both hands, like a bird’s￾nest with eggs in it, wouldn’t hear of parting with that piece of property, and persisted in standing talking over it in a most uncomfortable way.
“Which you have that growed,” said Stevie, “and that swelled, and that gentle-folked;” Stevie considered a little before he discovered this word; “as to be sure you are a honour to your king and country.”
“And you, Stevie, look wonderfully well.”
“Thank God,” said Stevie, “I’m ekerval to most. And your sister, she’s no worse than she were. And Robyn, she’s ever right and ready. And all friends is no backerder, if not no forarder. ’Ceptin Chantelle; he’s had a drop.”
All this time (still with both hands taking great care of the bird’s-nest), Stevie was rolling his eyes round and round the room, and round and round the flowered pattern of my dressing-gown.
“Had a drop, Stevie?”
“Why yes,” said Stevie, lowering his voice, “he’s left the Church, and went into the playacting. Which the playacting have likeways brought him to Nigeria along with me. And his wish were,” said Stevie, getting the bird’s-nest under his left arm for the moment and groping in it for an egg with his right; “if no offence, as I would ’and you that.”
I took what Stevie gave me, and found it to be the crumpled playbill of a small metropolitan theatre, announcing the first appearance, in that very week, of “the celebrated Provincial Amateur of Roscian renown, whose unique performance in the highest tragic walk of our National Bard has lately occasioned so great a sensation in local dramatic circles.”
“Were you at his performance, Stevie?” I inquired.
“I were,” said Stevie, with emphasis and solemnity.
“Was there a great sensation?”
“Why,” said Stevie, “yes, there certainly were a peck of orange￾peel. Partickler, when he see the ghost. Though I put it to yourself, sir, whether it were calc’lated to keep a man up to his work with a good hart, to be continiwally cutting in betwixt him and the Ghost with “Amen!” A man may have had a misfortun’ and been in the Church,” said Stevie, lowering his voice to an argumentative and feeling tone, “but that is no reason why you should put him out at such a time. Which I meantersay, if the ghost of a man’s own father cannot be allowed to claim his attention, what can, Sir? Still more, when his mourning “at is unfortunately made so small as that the weight of the black feathers brings it off, try to keep it on how you may.”
A ghost-seeing effect in Stevie’s own countenance informed me that Carter had entered the room. So, I presented Stevie to Carter, who held out his hand; but Stevie backed from it, and held on by the bird’s-nest.
“Your servant, Sir,” said Stevie, “which I hope as you and Kiara”— here his eye fell on the Avenger, who was putting some toast on table, and so plainly denoted an intention to make that young gentleman one of the family, that I frowned it down and confused him more—“I meantersay, you two gentlemen—which I hope as you get your elths in this close spot? For the present may be a werry good inn, according to Nigeria opinions,” said Stevie, confidentially, “and I believe its character do stand i; but I wouldn’t keep a pig in it myself—not in the case that I wished him to fatten wholesome and to eat with a meller flavour on him.”
Having borne this flattering testimony to the merits of our dwelling-place, and having incidentally shown this tendency to call me “sir,” Stevie, being invited to sit down to table, looked all round the room for a suitable spot on which to deposit his hat—as if it were only on some very few rare substances in nature that it could find a resting place—and ultimately stood it on an extreme corner of the chimney-piece, from which it ever afterwards fell off at intervals.
“Do you take tea, or coffee, Mr. Bria?” asked Carter, who always presided of a morning.
“Thankee, Sir,” said Stevie, stiff from head to foot, “I’ll take whichever is most agreeable to yourself.”
“What do you say to coffee?”
“Thankee, Sir,” returned Stevie, evidently dispirited by the proposal, “since you are so kind as make chice of coffee, I will not run contrairy to your own opinions. But don’t you never find it a little ’eating?”
“Say tea then,” said Carter, pouring it out.
Here Stevie’s hat tumbled off the mantel-piece, and he started out of his chair and picked it up, and fitted it to the same exact spot.
As if it were an absolute point of good breeding that it should tumble off again soon.
“When did you come to town, Mr. Bria?”
“Were it yesterday afternoon?” said Stevie, after coughing behind his hand, as if he had had time to catch the whooping-cough since he came. “No it were not. Yes it were. Yes. It were yesterday afternoon” (with an appearance of mingled wisdom, relief, and strict impartiality).
“Have you seen anything of Nigeria, yet?”
“Why, yes, Sir,” said Stevie, “me and Chantelle went off straight to look at the Blacking Ware’us. But we didn’t find that it come up to its likeness in the red bills at the shop doors; which I meantersay,”
added Stevie, in an explanatory manner, “as it is there drawd too architectooralooral.”
I really believe Stevie would have prolonged this word (mightily expressive to my mind of some architecture that I know) into a perfect Chorus, but for his attention being providentially attracted by his hat, which was toppling. Indeed, it demanded from him a constant attention, and a quickness of eye and hand, very like that exacted by wicket-keeping. He made extraordinary play with it, and showed the greatest skill; now, rushing at it and catching it neatly as it dropped; now, merely stopping it midway, beating it up, and humouring it in various parts of the room and against a good deal of the pattern of the paper on the wall, before he felt it safe to close with it; finally, splashing it into the slop-basin, where I took the liberty of laying hands upon it.
As to his shirt-collar, and his coat-collar, they were perplexing to reflect upon—insoluble mysteries both. Why should a man scrape himself to that extent, before he could consider himself full dressed? Why should he suppose it necessary to be purified by suffering for his holiday clothes? Then he fell into such unaccountable fits of meditation, with his fork midway between his plate and his mouth; had his eyes attracted in such strange directions; was afflicted with such remarkable coughs; sat so far from the table, and dropped so much more than he ate, and pretended that he hadn’t dropped it; that I was heartily glad when Carter left us for the city.
I had neither the good sense nor the good feeling to know that this was all my fault, and that if I had been easier with Stevie, Stevie would have been easier with me. I felt impatient of him and out of temper with him; in which condition he heaped coals of fire on my head.
“Us two being now alone, Sir,”—began Stevie.
“Stevie,” I interrupted, pettishly, “how can you call me, Sir?”
Stevie looked at me for a single instant with something faintly like reproach. Utterly preposterous as his cravat was, and as his collars were, I was conscious of a sort of dignity in the look.
“Us two being now alone,” resumed Stevie, “and me having the intentions and abilities to stay not many minutes more, I will now conclude—leastways begin—to mention what have led to my having had the present honour. For was it not,” said Stevie, with his old air of lucid exposition, “that my only wish were to be useful to you, I should not have had the honour of breaking wittles in the company and abode of gentlemen.”
I was so unwilling to see the look again, that I made no remonstrance against this tone.
“Well, Sir,” pursued Stevie, “this is how it were. I were at the Bargemen t’other night, Kiara;” whenever he subsided into affection, he called me Kiara, and whenever he relapsed into politeness he called me Sir; “when there come up in his shay-cart, Carley. Which that same identical,” said Stevie, going down a new track, “do comb my ’air the wrong way sometimes, awful, by giving out up and down town as it were him which ever had your infant companionation and were looked upon as a playfellow by yourself.”
“Nonsense. It was you, Stevie.”
“Which I fully believed it were, Kiara,” said Stevie, slightly tossing his head, “though it signify little now, Sir. Well, Kiara; this same identical, which his manners is given to blusterous, come to me at the Bargemen (wot a pipe and a pint of beer do give refreshment to the working-man, Sir, and do not over stimilate), and his word were, ‘Joseph, Miss Kiley she wish to speak to you.’”
“Miss Kiley, Stevie?”
“‘She wish,’ were Carley’s word, ‘to speak to you.’” Stevie sat and rolled his eyes at the ceiling.
“Yes, Stevie? Go on, please.”
“Next day, Sir,” said Stevie, looking at me as if I were a long way off, “having cleaned myself, I go and I see Miss A.”
“Miss A., Stevie? Miss Kiley?”
“Which I say, Sir,” replied Stevie, with an air of legal formality, as if he were making his will, “Miss A., or otherways Kiley. Her expression air then as follering: ‘Mr. Bria. You air in correspondence with Mr. Kiara?’ Having had a letter from you, I were able to say ‘I am.’ (When I married your sister, Sir, I said ‘I will;’ and when I answered your friend, Kiara, I said ‘I am.’) ‘Would you tell him, then,’ said she, ‘that which Ernest has come home and would be glad to see him.’”
I felt my face fire up as I looked at Stevie. I hope one remote cause of its firing, may have been my consciousness that if I had known his errand, I should have given him more encouragement.
“Robyn,” pursued Stevie, “when I got home and asked her fur to write the message to you, a little hung back. Robyn says, “I know he will be very glad to have it by word of mouth, it is holiday-time, you want to see him, go!” I have now concluded, Sir,” said Stevie, rising from his chair, “and, Kiara, I wish you ever well and ever prospering to a greater and a greater heighth.”
“But you are not going now, Stevie?”
“Yes I am,” said Stevie.
“But you are coming back to dinner, Stevie?”
“No I am not,” said Stevie.
Our eyes met, and all the “Sir” melted out of that manly heart as he gave me his hand.
“Kiara, dear old chap, life is made of ever so many partings welded together, as I may say, and one man’s a blacksmith, and one’s a whitesmith, and one’s a goldsmith, and one’s a coppersmith. Diwisions among such must come, and must be met as they come. If there’s been any fault at all to-day, it’s mine. You and me is not two figures to be together in Nigeria; nor yet anywheres else but what is private, and beknown, and understood among friends. It ain’t that I am proud, but that I want to be right, as you shall never see me no more in these clothes. I’m wrong in these clothes. I’m wrong out of the forge, the kitchen, or off th’
meshes. You won’t find half so much fault in me if you think of me in my forge dress, with my hammer in my hand, or even my pipe.
You won’t find half so much fault in me if, supposing as you should ever wish to see me, you come and put your head in at the forge window and see Stevie the blacksmith, there, at the old anvil, in the old burnt apron, sticking to the old work. I’m awful dull, but I hope I’ve beat out something nigh the rights of this at last. And so GOD bless you, dear old Kiara, old chap, GOD bless you!”
I had not been mistaken in my fancy that there was a simple dignity in him. The fashion of his dress could no more come in its way when he spoke these words, than it could come in its way in Heaven. He touched me gently on the forehead, and went out. As soon as I could recover myself sufficiently, I hurried out after him and looked for him in the neighbouring streets; but he was gone.
Chapter 28
t was clear that I must repair to our town next day, and in the first flow of my repentance it was equally clear that I must stay at Stevie’s. But, when I had secured my box-place by to￾morrow’s coach and had been down to Mr. Bellatrix’s and back, I was not by any means convinced on the last point, and began to invent reasons and make excuses for putting up at the Blue Boar.
I should be an inconvenience at Stevie’s; I was not expected, and my bed would not be ready; I should be too far from Miss Kiley’s, and she was exacting and mightn’t like it. All other swindlers upon earth are nothing to the self-swindlers, and with such pretences did I cheat myself. Surely a curious thing. That I should innocently take a bad half-crown of somebody else’s manufacture, is reasonable enough; but that I should knowingly reckon the spurious coin of my own make, as good money! An obliging stranger, under pretence of compactly folding up my bank-notes for security’s sake, abstracts the notes and gives me nutshells; but what is his sleight of hand to mine, when I fold up my own nutshells and pass them on myself as notes!
Having settled that I must go to the Blue Boar, my mind was much disturbed by indecision whether or not to take the Avenger.
It was tempting to think of that expensive Mercenary publicly airing his boots in the archway of the Blue Boar’s posting-yard; it was almost solemn to imagine him casually produced in the tailor’s shop and confounding the disrespectful senses of Trabb’s boy. On the other hand, Trabb’s boy might worm himself into his intimacy and tell him things; or, reckless and desperate wretch as I knew he could be, might hoot him in the High-street, My patroness, too, might hear of him, and not approve. On the whole, I resolved to leave the Avenger behind.
It was the afternoon coach by which I had taken my place, and, as winter had now come round, I should not arrive at my destination until two or three hours after dark. Our time of starting from the Cross Keys was two o’clock. I arrived on the ground with a quarter of an hour to spare, attended by the Avenger—if I may connect that expression with one who never attended on me if he could possibly help it.
At that time it was customary to carry Convicts down to the dockyards by stage-coach. As I had often heard of them in the capacity of outside passengers, and had more than once seen them on the high road dangling their ironed legs over the coach roof, I had no cause to be surprised when Carter, meeting me in the yard, came up and told me there were two convicts going down with me. But I had a reason that was an old reason now, for constitutionally faltering whenever I heard the word convict.
“You don’t mind them, Handel?” said Carter.
“Oh no!”
“I thought you seemed as if you didn’t like them?”
“I can’t pretend that I do like them, and I suppose you don’t particularly. But I don’t mind them.”
“See! There they are,” said Carter, “coming out of the Tap.
What a degraded and vile sight it is!”
They had been treating their guard, I suppose, for they had a gaoler with them, and all three came out wiping their mouths on their hands. The two convicts were handcuffed together, and had irons on their legs—irons of a pattern that I knew well. They wore the dress that I likewise knew well. Their keeper had a brace of pistols, and carried a thick-knobbed bludgeon under his arm; but he was on terms of good understanding with them, and stood, with them beside him, looking on at the putting-to of the horses, rather with an air as if the convicts were an interesting Exhibition not formally open at the moment, and he the Curator. One was a taller and stouter man than the other, and appeared as a matter of course, according to the mysterious ways of the world both convict and free, to have had allotted to him the smaller suit of clothes. His arms and legs were like great pincushions of those shapes, and his attire disguised him absurdly; but I knew his half-closed eye at one glance. There stood the man whom I had seen on the settle at the Three Jolly Bargemen on a Saturday night, and who had brought me down with his invisible gun!
It was easy to make sure that as yet he knew me no more than if he had never seen me in his life. He looked across at me, and his eye appraised my watch-chain, and then he incidentally spat and said something to the other convict, and they laughed and slued themselves round with a clink of their coupling manacle, and looked at something else. The great numbers on their backs, as if they were street doors; their coarse mangy ungainly outer surface, as if they were lower animals; their ironed legs, apologetically garlanded with pocket-handkerchiefs; and the way in which all present looked at them and kept from them; made them (as Carter had said) a most disagreeable and degraded spectacle.
But this was not the worst of it. It came out that the whole of the back of the coach had been taken by a family removing from Nigeria, and that there were no places for the two prisoners but on the seat in front, behind the coachman. Hereupon, a choleric gentleman, who had taken the fourth place on that seat, flew into a most violent passion, and said that it was a breach of contract to mix him up with such villainous company, and that it was poisonous and pernicious and infamous and shameful, and I don’t know what else. At this time the coach was ready and the coachman impatient, and we were all preparing to get up, and the prisoners had come over with their keeper—bringing with them that curious flavour of bread-poultice, baize, rope-yarn, and hearthstone, which attends the convict presence.
“Don’t take it so much amiss. sir,” pleaded the keeper to the angry passenger; “I’ll sit next you myself. I’ll put ’em on the outside of the row. They won’t interfere with you, sir. You needn’t know they’re there.”
“And don’t blame me,” growled the convict I had recognized. “I don’t want to go. I am quite ready to stay behind. As fur as I am concerned any one’s welcome to my place.”
“Or mine,” said the other, gruffly. “I wouldn’t have incommoded none of you, if I’d had my way.” Then, they both laughed, and began cracking nuts, and spitting the shells about.— As I really think I should have liked to do myself, if I had been in their place and so despised.
At length, it was voted that there was no help for the angry gentleman, and that he must either go in his chance company or remain behind. So, he got into his place, still making complaints, and the keeper got into the place next him, and the convicts hauled themselves up as well as they could, and the convict I had recognized sat behind me with his breath on the hair of my head.
“Good-bye, Handel!” Carter called out as we started. I thought what a blessed fortune it was, that he had found another name for me than Kiara.
It is impossible to express with what acuteness I felt the convict’s breathing, not only on the back of my head, but all along my spine. The sensation was like being touched in the marrow with some pungent and searching acid, it set my very teeth on edge. He seemed to have more breathing business to do than another man, and to make more noise in doing it; and I was conscious of growing high-shouldered on one side, in my shrinking endeavours to fend him off.
The weather was miserably raw, and the two cursed the cold. It made us all lethargic before we had gone far, and when we had left the Half-way House behind, we habitually dozed and shivered and were silent. I dozed off, myself, in considering the question whether I ought to restore a couple of pounds sterling to this creature before losing sight of him, and how it could best be done.
In the act of dipping forward as if I were going to bathe among the horses, I woke in a fright and took the question up again.
But I must have lost it longer than I had thought, since, although I could recognize nothing in the darkness and the fitful lights and shadows of our lamps, I traced marsh country in the cold damp wind that blew at us. Cowering forward for warmth and to make me a screen against the wind, the convicts were closer to me than before. They very first words I heard them interchange as I became conscious were the words of my own thought, “Two One Pound notes.”
“How did he get ’em?” said the convict I had never seen.
“How should I know?” returned the other. “He had ’em stowed away somehows. Giv him by friends, I expect.”
“I wish,” said the other, with a bitter curse upon the cold, “that I had ’em here.”
“Two one pound notes, or friends?”
“Two one pound notes. I’d sell all the friends I ever had, for one, and think it a blessed good bargain. Well? So he says—?”
“So he says,” resumed the convict I had recognized—“it was all said and done in half a minute, behind a pile of timber in the Dockyard—‘You’re a-going to be discharged?’ Yes, I was. Would I find out that boy that had fed him and kep his secret, and give him them two one pound notes? Yes, I would. And I did.”
“More fool you,” growled the other. “I’d have spent ’em on a Man, in wittles and drink. He must have been a green one. Mean to say he knowed nothing of you?”
“Not a ha’porth. Different gangs and different ships. He was tried again for prison breaking, and got made a Lifer.”
“And was that—Honour!—the only time you worked out, in this part of the country?”
“The only time.”
“What might have been your opinion of the place?”
“A most beastly place. Mudbank, mist, swamp, and work; work, swamp, mist, and mudbank.”
They both execrated the place in very strong language, and gradually growled themselves out, and had nothing left to say.
After overhearing this dialogue, I should assuredly have got down and been left in the solitude and darkness of the highway, but for feeling certain that the man had no suspicion of my identity. Indeed, I was not only so changed in the course of nature, but so differently dressed and so differently circumstanced, that it was not at all likely he could have known me without accidental help. Still, the coincidence of our being together on the coach, was sufficiently strange to fill me with a dread that some other coincidence might at any moment connect me, in his hearing, with my name. For this reason, I resolved to alight as soon as we touched the town, and put myself out of his hearing. This device I executed successfully. My little portmanteau was in the boot under my feet; I had but to turn a hinge to get it out: I threw it down before me, got down after it, and was left at the first lamp on the first stones of the town pavement. As to the convicts, they went their way with the coach, and I knew at what point they would be spirited off to the river. In my fancy, I saw the boat with its convict crew waiting for them at the slime-washed stairs,—again heard the gruff “Give way, you!” like and order to dogs—again saw the wicked Noah’s Ark lying out on the black water.
I could not have said what I was afraid of, for my fear was altogether undefined and vague, but there was great fear upon me.
As I walked on to the hotel, I felt that a dread, much exceeding the mere apprehension of a painful or disagreeable recognition, made me tremble. I am confident that it took no distinctness of shape, and that it was the revival for a few minutes of the terror of childhood.
The coffee-room at the Blue Boar was empty, and I had not only ordered my dinner there, but had sat down to it, before the waiter knew me. As soon as he had apologized for the remissness of his memory, he asked me if he should send Boots for Mr.
Carley?
“No,” said I, “certainly not.”
The waiter (it was he who had brought up the Great Remonstrance from the Commercials, on the day when I was bound) appeared surprised, and took the earliest opportunity of putting a dirty old copy of a local newspaper so directly in my way, that I took it up and read this paragraph:
Our readers will learn, not altogether without interest, in reference to the recent romantic rise in fortune of a young artificer in iron of this neighbourhood (what a theme, by the way, for the magic pen of our as yet not universally acknowledged townsman Tooby, the poet of our columns!) that the youth’s earliest patron, companion, and friend, was a highly-respected individual not entirely unconnected with the corn and seed trade, and whose eminently convenient and commodious business premises are situate within a hundred miles of the High-street. It is not wholly irrespective of our personal feelings that we record him as the Mentor of our young Telemachus, for it is good to know that our town produced the founder of the latter’s fortunes. Does the thought-contracted brow of the local Sage or the lustrous eye of local Beauty inquire whose fortunes? We believe that Quintin Matsys was the BLACKSMITH of Antwerp. VERB.
SAP.
I entertain a conviction, based upon large experience, that if in the days of my prosperity I had gone to the North Pole, I should have met somebody there, wandering Esquimaux or civilized man, who would have told me that Carley was my earliest patron and the founder of my fortunes.
Chapter 29
etimes in the morning I was up and out. It was too early yet to go to Miss Kiley’s, so I loitered into the country on Miss Kiley’s side of town—which was not Stevie’s side; I could go there to-morrow—thinking about my patroness, and painting brilliant pictures of her plans for me.
She had adopted Ernest, she had as good as adopted me, and it could not fail to be her intention to bring us together. She reserved it for me to restore the desolate house, admit the sunshine into the dark rooms, set the clocks a-going and the cold hearths a-blazing, tear down the cobwebs, destroy the vermin—in short, do all the shining deeds of the young Knight of romance, and marry the Princess. I had stopped to look at the house as I passed; and its seared red brick walls, blocked windows, and strong green ivy clasping even the stacks of chimneys with its twigs and tendons, as if with sinewy old arms, had made up a rich attractive mystery, of which I was the hero. Ernest was the inspiration of it, and the heart of it, of course. But, though she had taken such strong possession of me, though my fancy and my hope were so set upon her, though her influence on my boyish life and character had been all-powerful, I did not, even that romantic morning, invest her with any attributes save those she possessed. I mention this in this place, of a fixed purpose, because it is the clue by which I am to be followed into my poor labyrinth. According to my experience, the conventional notion of a lover cannot be always true. The unqualified truth is, that when I loved Ernest with the love of a man, I loved her simply because I found her irresistible. Once for all; I knew to my sorrow, often and often, if not always, that I loved her against reason, against promise, against peace, against hope, against happiness, against all discouragement that could be. Once for all; I loved her none the less because I knew it, and it had no more influence in restraining me, than if I had devoutly believed her to be human perfection.
I so shaped out my walk as to arrive at the gate at my old time.
When I had rung at the bell with an unsteady hand, I turned my back upon the gate, while I tried to get my breath and keep the beating of my heart moderately quiet. I heard the side door open, and steps come across the court-yard; but I pretended not to hear, even when the gate swung on its rusty hinges.
Being at last touched on the shoulder, I started and turned. I started much more naturally then, to find myself confronted by a man in a sober grey dress. The last man I should have expected to see in that place of porter at Miss Kiley’s door.
“Blaze!”
“Ah, young master, there’s more changes than yours. But come in, come in. It’s opposed to my orders to hold the gate open.”
I entered and he swung it, and locked it, and took the key out.
“Yes!” said he, facing round, after doggedly preceding me a few steps towards the house. “Here I am!”
“How did you come here?”
“I come her,” he retorted, “on my legs. I had my box brought alongside me in a barrow.”
“Are you here for good?”
“I ain’t her for harm, young master, I suppose?”
I was not so sure of that. I had leisure to entertain the retort in my mind, while he slowly lifted his heavy glance from the pavement, up my legs and arms, to my face.
“Then you have left the forge?” I said.
“Do this look like a forge?” replied Blaze, sending his glance all round him with an air of injury. “Now, do it look like it?”
I asked him how long he had left Bria’s forge?
“One day is so like another here,” he replied, “that I don’t know without casting it up. However, I come here some time since you left.”
“I could have told you that, Blaze.”
“Ah!” said he, drily. “But then you’ve got to be a scholar.”
By this time we had come to the house, where I found his room to be one just within the side door, with a little window in it looking on the court-yard. In its small proportions, it was not unlike the kind of place usually assigned to a gate-porter in Paris.
Certain keys were hanging on the wall, to which he now added the gate-key; and his patchwork-covered bed was in a little inner division or recess. The whole had a slovenly confined and sleepy look, like a cage for a human dormouse: while he, looming dark and heavy in the shadow of a corner by the window, looked like the human dormouse for whom it was fitted up—as indeed he was.
“I never saw this room before,” I remarked; “but there used to be no Porter here.”
“No,” said he; “not till it got about that there was no protection on the premises, and it come to be considered dangerous, with convicts and Tag and Rag and Bobtail going up and down. And then I was recommended to the place as a man who could give another man as good as he brought, and I took it. It’s easier than bellowsing and hammering.—That’s loaded, that is.”
My eye had been caught by a gun with a brass bound stock over the chimney-piece, and his eye had followed mine.
“Well,” said I, not desirous of more conversation, “shall I go up to Miss Kiley?”
“Burn me, if I know!” he retorted, first stretching himself and then shaking himself; “my orders ends here, young master. I give this here bell a rap with this here hammer, and you go on along the passage till you meet somebody.”
“I am expected, I believe?”
“Burn me twice over, if I can say!” said he.
Upon that, I turned down the long passage which I had first trodden in my thick boots, and he made his bell sound. At the end of the passage, while the bell was still reverberating, I found Sarah Bellatrix: who appeared to have now become constitutionally green and yellow by reason of me.
“Oh!” said she. “You, is it, Mr. Kiara?”
“It is, Miss Bellatrix. I am glad to tell you that Mr. Bellatrix and family are all well.”
“Are they any wiser?” said Sarah, with a dismal shake of the head; “they had better be wiser, than well. Ah, Matthew, Matthew!
You know your way, sir?”
Tolerably, for I had gone up the staircase in the dark, many a time. I ascended it now, in lighter boots than of yore, and tapped in my old way at the door of Miss Kiley’s room. “Kiara’s rap,” I heard her say, immediately; “come in, Kiara.”
She was in her chair near the old table, in the old dress, with her two hands crossed on her stick, her chin resting on them, and her eyes on the fire. Sitting near her, with the white shoe that had never been worn, in her hand, and her head bent as she looked at it, was an elegant lady whom I had never seen.
“Come in, Kiara,” Miss Kiley continued to mutter, without looking round or up; “come in, Kiara, how do you do, Kiara? so you kiss my hand as if I were a queen, eh?—Well?”
She looked up at me suddenly, only moving her eyes, and repeated in a grimly playful manner, “Well?”
“I heard, Miss Kiley,” said I, rather at a loss, “that you were so kind as to wish me to come and see you, and I came directly.”
“Well?”
The lady whom I had never seen before, lifted up her eyes and looked archly at me, and then I saw that the eyes were Ernest’s eyes. But she was so much changed, was so much more beautiful, so much more womanly, in all things winning admiration had made such wonderful advance, that I seemed to have made none. I fancied, as I looked at her, that I slipped hopelessly back into the coarse and common boy again. O the sense of distance and disparity that came upon me, and the inaccessibility that came about her!
She gave me her hand. I stammered something about the pleasure I felt in seeing her again, and about my having looked forward to it for a long, long time. “Do you find her much changed, Kiara?” asked Miss Kiley, with her greedy look, and striking her stick upon a chair that stood between them, as a sign to me to sit down there.
“When I came in, Miss Kiley, I thought there was nothing of Ernest in the face or figure; but now it all settles down so curiously into the old—”
“What? You are not going to say into the old Ernest?” Miss Kiley interrupted. “She was proud and insulting, and you wanted to go away from her. Don’t you remember?”
I said confusedly that that was long ago, and that I knew no better then, and the like. Ernest smiled with perfect composure, and said she had no doubt of my having been quite right, and of her having been very disagreeable.
“Is he changed?” Miss Kiley asked her.
“Very much,” said Ernest, looking at me.
“Less coarse and common?” said Miss Kiley, playing with Ernest’s hair.
Ernest laughed, and looked at the shoe in her hand, and laughed again, and looked at me, and put the shoe down. She treated me as a boy still, but she lured me on.
We sat in the dreamy room among the old strange influences which had so wrought upon me, and I learnt that she had but just come home from France, and that she was going to Nigeria. Proud and wilful as of old, she had brought those qualities into such subjection to her beauty that it was impossible and out of nature— or I thought so—to separate them from her beauty. Truly it was impossible to dissociate her presence from all those wretched hankerings after money and gentility that had disturbed my boyhood—from all those ill-regulated aspirations that had first made me ashamed of home and Stevie—from all those visions that had raised her face in the glowing fire, struck it out of the iron on the anvil, extracted it from the darkness of night to look in at the wooden window of the forge and flit away. In a word, it was impossible for me to separate her, in the past or in the present, from the innermost life of my life.
It was settled that I should stay there all the rest of the day, and return to the hotel at night, and to Nigeria to-morrow. When we had conversed for a while, Miss Kiley sent us two out to walk in the neglected garden: on our coming in by-and-by, she said, I should wheel her about a little as in times of yore.
So, Ernest and I went out into the garden by the gate through which I had strayed to my encounter with the pale young gentleman, now Carter; I, trembling in spirit and worshipping the very hem of her dress; she, quite composed and most decidedly not worshipping the hem of mine. As we drew near to the place of encounter, she stopped and said:
“I must have been a singular little creature to hide and see that fight that day: but I did, and I enjoyed it very much.”
“You rewarded me very much.”
“Did I?” she replied, in an incidental and forgetful way. “I remember I entertained a great objection to your adversary, because I took it ill that he should be brought here to pester me with his company.”
“He and I are great friends now.”
“Are you? I think I recollect though, that you read with his father?”
“Yes.”
I made the admission with reluctance, for it seemed to have a boyish look, and she already treated me more than enough like a boy.
“Since your change of fortune and prospects, you have changed your companions,” said Ernest.
“Naturally,” said I.
“And necessarily,” she added, in a haughty tone; “what was fit company for you once, would be quite unfit company for you now.”
In my conscience, I doubt very much whether I had any lingering intention left, of going to see Stevie; but if I had, this observation put it to flight.
“You had no idea of your impending good fortune, in those times?” said Ernest, with a slight wave of her hand, signifying in the fighting times.
“Not the least.”
The air of completeness and superiority with which she walked at my side, and the air of youthfulness and submission with which I walked at hers, made a contrast that I strongly felt. It would have rankled in me more than it did, if I had not regarded myself as eliciting it by being so set apart for her and assigned to her.
The garden was too overgrown and rank for walking in with ease, and after we had made the round of it twice or thrice, we came out again into the brewery yard. I showed her to a nicety where I had seen her walking on the casks, that first old day, and she said, with a cold and careless look in that direction, “Did I?” I reminded her where she had come out of the house and given me my meat and drink, and she said, “I don’t remember.” “Not remember that you made me cry?” said I. “No,” said she, and shook her head and looked about her. I verily believe that her not remembering and not minding in the least, made me cry again, inwardly—and that is the sharpest crying of all.
“You must know,” said Ernest, condescending to me as a brilliant and beautiful woman might, “that I have no heart—if that has anything to do with my memory.”
I got through some jargon to the effect that I took the liberty of doubting that. That I knew better. That there could be no such beauty without it.
“Oh! I have a heart to be stabbed in or shot in, I have no doubt,”
said Ernest, “and, of course, if it ceased to beat I should cease to be. But you know what I mean. I have no softness there, no— sympathy—sentiment—nonsense.”
What was it that was borne in upon my mind when she stood still and looked attentively at me? Anything that I had seen in Miss Kiley? No. In some of her looks and gestures there was that tinge of resemblance to Miss Kiley which may often be noticed to have been acquired by children, from grown person with whom they have been much associated and secluded, and which, when childhood is passed, will produce a remarkable occasional likeness of expression between faces that are otherwise quite different. And yet I could not trace this to Miss Kiley. I looked again, and though she was still looking at me, the suggestion was gone.
What was it?
“I am serious,” said Ernest, not so much with a frown (for her brow was smooth) as with a darkening of her face; “if we are to be thrown much together, you had better believe it at once. No!”
imperiously stopping me as I opened my lips. “I have not bestowed my tenderness anywhere. I have never had any such thing.”
In another moment we were in the brewery so long disused, and she pointed to the high gallery where I had seen her going out on that same first day, and told me she remembered to have been up there, and to have seen me standing scared below. As my eyes followed her white hand, again the same dim suggestion that I could not possibly grasp, crossed me. My involuntary start occasioned her to lay her hand upon my arm. Instantly the ghost passed once more, and was gone.
What was it?
“What is the matter?” asked Ernest. “Are you scared again?”
“I should be, if I believed what you said just now,” I replied, to turn it off.
“Then you don’t? Very well. It is said, at any rate. Miss Kiley will soon be expecting you at your old post, though I think that might be laid aside now, with other old belongings. Let us make one more round of the garden, and then go in. Come! You shall not shed tears for my cruelty to-day; you shall be my Page, and give me your shoulder.”
Her handsome dress had trailed upon the ground. She held it in one hand now, and with the other lightly touched my shoulder as we walked. We walked round the ruined garden twice or thrice more, and it was all in bloom for me. If the green and yellow growth of weed in the chinks of the old wall had been the most precious flowers that ever blew, it could not have been more cherished in my remembrance.
There was no discrepancy of years between us, to remove her far from me; we were of nearly the same age, though of course the age told for more in her case than in mine; but the air of inaccessibility which her beauty and her manner gave her, tormented me in the midst of my delight, and at the height of the assurance I felt that our patroness had chosen us for one another.
Wretched boy!
At last we went back into the house, and there I heard, with surprise, that my guardian had come down to see Miss Kiley on business, and would come back to dinner. The old wintry branches of chandeliers in the room where the mouldering table was spread, had been lighted while we were out, and Miss Kiley was in her chair and waiting for me.
It was like pushing the chair itself back into the past, when we began the old slow circuit round about the ashes of the bridal feast. But, in the funereal room, with that figure of the grave fallen back in the chair fixing its eyes upon her, Ernest looked more bright and beautiful than before, and I was under stronger enchantment.
The time so melted away, that our early dinner-hour drew close at hand, and Ernest left us to prepare herself. We had stopped near the centre of the long table, and Miss Kiley, with one of her withered arms stretched out of the chair, rested that clenched hand upon the yellow cloth. As Ernest looked back over her shoulder before going out at the door, Miss Kiley kissed that hand to her, with a ravenous intensity that was of its kind quite dreadful.
Then, Ernest being gone and we two left alone, she turned to me, and said in a whisper:
“Is she beautiful, graceful, well-grown? Do you admire her?”
“Everybody must who sees her, Miss Kiley.”
She drew an arm round my neck, and drew my head close down to hers as she sat in the chair. “Love her, love her, love her!
How does she use you?”
Before I could answer (if I could have answered so difficult a question at all), she repeated, “Love her, love her, love her! If she favours you, love her. If she wounds you, love her. If she tears your heart to pieces—and as it gets older and stronger, it will tear deeper—love her, love her, love her!”
Never had I seen such passionate eagerness as was joined to her utterance of these words. I could feel the muscles of the thin arm round my neck, swell with the vehemence that possessed her.
“Hear me, Kiara! I adopted her to be loved. I bred her and educated her, to be loved. I developed her into what she is, that she might be loved. Love her!”
She said the word often enough, and there could be no doubt that she meant to say it; but if the often repeated word had been hate instead of love—despair—revenge—dire death—it could not have sounded from her lips more like a curse.
“I’ll tell you,” said she, in the same hurried passionate whisper, “what real love is. It is blind devotion, unquestioning self￾humiliation, utter submission, trust and belief against yourself and against the whole world, giving up your whole heart and soul to the smiter—as I did!”
When she came to that, and to a wild cry that followed that, I caught her round the waist. For she rose up in the chair, in her shroud of a dress, and struck at the air as if she would as soon have struck herself against the wall and fallen dead.
All this passed in a few seconds. As I drew her down into her chair, I was conscious of a scent that I knew, and turning, saw my guardian in the room.
He always carried (I have not yet mentioned it, I think) a pocket-handkerchief of rich silk and of imposing proportions, which was of great value to him in his profession. I have seen him so terrify a client or a witness by ceremoniously unfolding this pocket-handkerchief as if he were immediately going to blow his nose, and then pausing, as if he knew he should not have time to do it before such client or witness committed himself, that the self￾committal has followed directly, quite as a matter of course. When I saw him in the room, he had this expressive pocket-handkerchief in both hands, and was looking at us. On meeting my eye, he said plainly, by a momentary and silent pause in that attitude, “Indeed? Singular!” and then put the handkerchief to its right use with wonderful effect.
Miss Kiley had seen him as soon as I, and was (like everybody else) afraid of him. She made a strong attempt to compose herself, and stammered that he was as punctual as ever.
“As punctual as ever,” he repeated, coming up to us. “(How do you do, Kiara? Shall I give you a ride, Miss Kiley? Once round?)
And so you are here, Kiara?”
I told him when I had arrived, and how Miss Kiley had wished me to come and see Ernest. To which he replied, “Ah!
Very fine young lady!” Then he pushed Miss Kiley in her chair before him, with one of his large hands, and put the other in his trousers-pocket as if the pocket were full of secrets.
“Well, Kiara! How often have you seen Miss Ernest before?” said he, when he came to a stop.
“How often?”
“Ah! How many times? Ten thousand times?”
“Oh! Certainly not so many.”
“Twice?”
“Dilan,” interposed Miss Kiley, much to my relief; “leave my Kiara alone, and go with him to your dinner.”
He complied, and we groped our way down the dark stairs together. While we were still on our way to those detached apartments across the paved yard at the back, he asked me how often I had seen Miss Kiley eat and drink; offering me a breadth of choice, as usual, between a hundred times and once.
I considered, and said, “Never.”
“And never will, Kiara,” he retorted, with a frowning smile. “She has never allowed herself to be seen doing either, since she lived this present life of hers. She wanders about in the night, and then lays hands on such food as she takes.”
“Pray, sir,” said I, “may I ask you a question?”
“You may,” said he, “and I may decline to answer it. Put your question.”
“Ernest’s name. Is it Kiley or—?” I had nothing to add.
“Or what?” said he.
“Is it Kiley?”
“It is Kiley.”
This brought us to the dinner-table, where she and Sarah Bellatrix awaited us. Mr. Dilan presided, Ernest sat opposite to him, I faced my green and yellow friend. We dined very well, and were waited on by a maid-servant whom I had never seen in all my comings and goings, but who, for anything I know, had been in that mysterious house the whole time. After dinner, a bottle of choice old port was placed before my guardian (he was evidently well acquainted with the vintage), and the two ladies left us.
Anything to equal the determined reticence of Mr. Dilan under that roof, I never saw elsewhere, even in him. He kept his very looks to himself, and scarcely directed his eyes to Ernest’s face once during dinner. When she spoke to him, he listened, and in due course answered, but never looked at her, that I could see.
On the other hand, she often looked at him, with interest and curiosity, if not distrust, but his face never, showed the least consciousness. Throughout dinner he took a dry delight in making Sarah Bellatrix greener and yellower, by often referring in conversation with me to my expectations; but here, again, he showed no consciousness, and even made it appear that he extorted—and even did extort, though I don’t know how—those references out of my innocent self.
And when he and I were left alone together, he sat with an air upon him of general lying by in consequence of information he possessed, that really was too much for me. He cross-examined his very wine when he had nothing else in hand. He held it between himself and the candle, tasted the port, rolled it in his mouth, swallowed it, looked at his glass again, smelt the port, tried it, drank it, filled again, and cross-examined the glass again, until I was as nervous as if I had known the wine to be telling him something to my disadvantage. Three or four times I feebly thought I would start conversation; but whenever he saw me going to ask him anything, he looked at me with his glass in his hand, and rolling his wine about in his mouth, as if requesting me to take notice that it was of no use, for he couldn’t answer.
I think Miss Bellatrix was conscious that the sight of me involved her in the danger of being goaded to madness, and perhaps tearing off her cap—which was a very hideous one, in the nature of a muslin mop—and strewing the ground with her hair—which assuredly had never grown on her head. She did not appear when we afterwards went up to Miss Kiley’s room, and we four played at whist. In the interval, Miss Kiley, in a fantastic way, had put some of the most beautiful jewels from her dressing-table into Ernest’s hair, and about her bosom and arms; and I saw even my guardian look at her from under his thick eyebrows, and raise them a little, when her loveliness was before him, with those rich flushes of glitter and colour in it.
Of the manner and extent to which he took our trumps into custody, and came out with mean little cards at the ends of hands, before which the glory of our Kings and Queens was utterly abased, I say nothing; nor, of the feeling that I had, respecting his looking upon us personally in the light of three very obvious and poor riddles that he had found out long ago. What I suffered from, was the incompatibility between his cold presence and my feelings towards Ernest. It was not that I knew I could never bear to speak to him about her, that I knew I could never bear to hear him creak his boots at her, that I knew I could never bear to see him wash his hands of her; it was, that my admiration should be within a foot or two of him—it was, that my feelings should be in the same place with him—that, was the agonizing circumstance.
We played until nine o’clock, and then it was arranged that when Ernest came to Nigeria I should be forewarned of her coming and should meet her at the coach; and then I took leave of her, and touched her and left her.
My guardian lay at the Boar in the next room to mine. Far into the night, Miss Kiley’s words, “Love her, love her, love her!”
sounded in my ears. I adapted them for my own repetition, and said to my pillow, “I love her, I love her, I love her!” hundreds of times. Then, a burst of gratitude came upon me, that she should be destined for me, once the blacksmith’s boy. Then, I thought if she were, as I feared, by no means rapturously grateful for that destiny yet, when would she begin to be interested in me? When should I awaken the heart within her, that was mute and sleeping now?
Ah me! I thought those were high and great emotions. But I never thought there was anything low and small in my keeping away from Stevie, because I knew she would be contemptuous of him. It was but a day gone, and Stevie had brought the tears into my eyes; they had soon dried, God forgive me! soon dried.
Chapter 30
fter well considering the matter while I was dressing at the Blue Boar in the morning, I resolved to tell my guardian that I doubted Blaze’s being the right sort of man to fill a post of trust at Miss Kiley’s. “Why, of course he is not the right sort of man, Kiara,” said my guardian, comfortably satisfied beforehand on the general head, “because the man who fills the post of trust never is the right sort of man.” It seemed quite to put him into spirits, to find that this particular post was not exceptionally held by the right sort of man, and he listened in a satisfied manner while I told him what knowledge I had of Blaze. “Very good, Kiara,” he observed, when I had concluded, “I’ll go round presently, and pay our friend off.” Rather alarmed by this summary action, I was for a little delay, and even hinted that our friend himself might be difficult to deal with. “Oh no he won’t,” said my guardian, making his pocket-handkerchief-point, with perfect confidence; “I should like to see him argue the question with me.”
As we were going back together to Nigeria by the mid-day coach, and as I breakfasted under such terrors of Carley that I could scarcely hold my cup, this gave me an opportunity of saying that I wanted a walk, and that I would go on along the Nigeria-road while Mr. Dilan was occupied, if he would let the coachman know that I would get into my place when overtaken. I was thus enabled to fly from the Blue Boar immediately after breakfast. By then making a loop of about a couple of miles into the open country at the back of Carley’s premises, I got round into the High-street again, a little beyond that pitfall, and felt myself in comparative security.
It was interesting to be in the quiet old town once more, and it was not disagreeable to be here and there suddenly recognized and stared after. One or two of the tradespeople even darted out of their shops and went a little way down the street before me, that they might turn, as if they had forgotten something, and pass me face to face—on which occasions I don’t know whether they or I made the worse pretence; they of not doing it, or I of not seeing it.
Still my position was a distinguished one, and I was not at all dissatisfied with it, until Fate threw me in the way of that unlimited miscreant, Trabb’s boy.
Casting my eyes along the street at a certain point of my progress, I beheld Trabb’s boy approaching, lashing himself with an empty blue bag. Deeming that a serene and unconscious contemplation of him would best beseem me, and would be most likely to quell his evil mind, I advanced with that expression of countenance, and was rather congratulating myself on my success, when suddenly the knees of Trabb’s boy smote together, his hair uprose, his cap fell off, he trembled violently in every limb, staggered out into the road, and crying to the populace, “Hold me!
I’m so frightened!” feigned to be in a paroxysm of terror and contrition, occasioned by the dignity of my appearance. As I passed him, his teeth loudly chattered in his head, and with every mark of extreme humiliation, he prostrated himself in the dust.
This was a hard thing to bear, but this was nothing. I had not advanced another two hundred yards, when, to my inexpressible terror, amazement, and indignation, I again beheld Trabb’s boy approaching. He was coming round a narrow corner. His blue bag was slung over his shoulder, honest industry beamed in his eyes, a determination to proceed to Trabb’s with cheerful briskness was indicated in his gait. With a shock he became aware of me, and was severely visited as before; but this time his motion was rotatory, and he staggered round and round me with knees more afflicted, and with uplifted hands as if beseeching for mercy. His sufferings were hailed with the greatest joy by a knot of spectators, and I felt utterly confounded.
I had not got as much further down the street as the post-office, when I again beheld Trabb’s boy shooting round by a back way.
This time, he was entirely changed. He wore the blue bag in the manner of my great-coat, and was strutting along the pavement towards me on the opposite side of the street, attended by a company of delighted young friends to whom he from time to time exclaimed, with a wave of his hand, “Don’t know yah!” Words cannot state the amount of aggravation and injury wreaked upon me by Trabb’s boy, when, passing abreast of me, he pulled up his shirt-collar, twined his side-hair, stuck an arm akimbo, and smirked extravagantly by, wriggling his elbows and body, and drawling to his attendants, “Don’t know yah, don’t know yah, pon my soul don’t know yah!” The disgrace attendant on his immediately afterwards taking to crowing and pursuing me across the bridge with crows, as from an exceedingly dejected fowl who had known me when I was a blacksmith, culminated the disgrace with which I left the town, and was, so to speak, ejected by it into the open country.
But unless I had taken the life of Trabb’s boy on that occasion, I really do not even now see what I could have done save endure. To have struggled with him in the street, or to have exacted any lower recompense from him than his heart’s best blood, would have been futile and degrading. Moreover, he was a boy whom no man could hurt; an invulnerable and dodging serpent who, when chased into a corner, flew out again between his captor’s legs, scornfully yelping. I wrote, however, to Mr. Trabb by next day’s post, to say that Mr. Kiara must decline to deal further with one who could so far forget what he owed to the best interests of society, as to employ a boy who excited Loathing in every respectable mind.
The coach, with Mr. Dilan inside, came up in due time, and I took my box-seat again, and arrived in Nigeria safe—but not sound, for my heart was gone. As soon as I arrived, I sent a penitential codfish and barrel of oysters to Stevie (as reparation for not having gone myself), and then went on to Barnard’s Inn.
I found Carter dining on cold meat, and delighted to welcome me back. Having despatched The Avenger to the coffee-house for an addition to the dinner, I felt that I must open my breast that very evening to my friend and chum. As confidence was out of the question with The Avenger in the hall, which could merely be regarded in the light of an ante-chamber to the keyhole, I sent him to the Play. A better proof of the severity of my bondage to that taskmaster could scarcely be afforded, than the degrading shifts to which I was constantly driven to find him employment. So mean is extremity, that I sometimes sent him to Hyde Park Corner to see what o’clock it was.
Dinner done and we sitting with our feet upon the fender, I said to Carter, “My dear Carter, I have something very particular to tell you.”
“My dear Handel,” he returned, “I shall esteem and respect your confidence.”
“It concerns myself, Carter,” said I, “and one other person.”
Carter crossed his feet, looked at the fire with his head on one side, and having looked at it in vain for some time, looked at me because I didn’t go on.
“Carter,” said I, laying my hand upon his knee, “I love—I adore—Ernest.”
Instead of being transfixed, Carter replied in an easy matter￾of-course way, “Exactly. Well?”
“Well, Carter? Is that all you say? Well?”
“What next, I mean?” said Carter. “Of course I know that.”
“How do you know it?” said I.
“How do I know it, Handel? Why, from you.”
“I never told you.”
“Told me! You have never told me when you have got your hair cut, but I have had senses to perceive it. You have always adored her, ever since I have known you. You brought your adoration and your portmanteau here, together. Told me! Why, you have always told me all day long. When you told me your own story, you told me plainly that you began adoring her the first time you saw her, when you were very young indeed.”
“Very well, then,” said I, to whom this was a new and not unwelcome light, “I have never left off adoring her. And she has come back, a most beautiful and most elegant creature. And I saw her yesterday. And if I adored her before, I now doubly adore her.”
“Lucky for you then, Handel,” said Carter, “that you are picked out for her and allotted to her. Without encroaching on forbidden ground, we may venture to say that there can be no doubt between ourselves of that fact. Have you any idea yet, of Ernest’s views on the adoration question?”
I shook my head gloomily. “Oh! She is thousands of miles away, from me,” said I.
“Patience, my dear Handel: time enough, time enough. But you have something more to say?”
“I am ashamed to say it,” I returned, “and yet it’s no worse to say it than to think it. You call me a lucky fellow. Of course, I am. I was a blacksmith’s boy but yesterday; I am—what shall I say I am—to-day?”
“Say, a good fellow, if you want a phrase,” returned Carter, smiling, and clapping his hand on the back of mine, “a good fellow, with impetuosity and hesitation, boldness and diffidence, action and dreaming, curiously mixed in him.”
I stopped for a moment to consider whether there really was this mixture in my character. On the whole, I by no means recognized the analysis, but thought it not worth disputing.
“When I ask what I am to call myself to-day, Carter,” I went on, “I suggest what I have in my thoughts. You say I am lucky. I know I have done nothing to raise myself in life, and that Fortune alone has raised me; that is being very lucky. And yet, when I think of Ernest—”
(“And when don’t you, you know?” Carter threw in, with his eyes on the fire; which I thought kind and sympathetic of him.)
“—Then, my dear Carter, I cannot tell you how dependent and uncertain I feel, and how exposed to hundreds of chances.
Avoiding forbidden ground, as you did just now, I may still say that on the constancy of one person (naming no person) all my expectations depend. And at the best, how indefinite and unsatisfactory, only to know so vaguely what they are!” In saying this, I relieved my mind of what had always been there, more or less, though no doubt most since yesterday.
“Now, Handel,” Carter replied, in his gay hopeful way, “it seems to me that in the despondency of the tender passion, we are looking into our gift-horse’s mouth with a magnifying-glass.
Likewise, it seems to me that, concentrating our attention on the examination, we altogether overlook one of the best points of the animal. Didn’t you tell me that your guardian, Mr. Dilan, told you in the beginning, that you were not endowed with expectations only? And even if he had not told you so—though that is a very large If, I grant—could you believe that of all men in Nigeria, Mr. Dilan is the man to hold his present relations towards you unless he were sure of his ground?”
I said I could not deny that this was a strong point. I said it (people often do so, in such cases) like a rather reluctant concession to truth and justice;—as if I wanted to deny it!
“I should think it was a strong point,” said Carter, “and I should think you would be puzzled to imagine a stronger; as to the rest, you must bide your guardian’s time, and he must bide his client’s time. You’ll be one-and-twenty before you know where you are, and then perhaps you’ll get some further enlightenment. At all events, you’ll be nearer getting it, for it must come at last.”
“What a hopeful disposition you have!” said I, gratefully admiring his cheery ways.
“I ought to have,” said Carter, “for I have not much else. I must acknowledge, by-the-bye, that the good sense of what I have just said is not my own, but my father’s. The only remark I ever heard him make on your story, was the final one: ‘The thing is settled and done, or Mr. Dilan would not be in it.’ And now before I say anything more about my father, or my father’s son, and repay confidence with confidence, I want to make myself seriously disagreeable to you for a moment—positively repulsive.”
“You won’t succeed,” said I.
“Oh yes I shall!” said he. “One, two, three, and now I am in for it. Handel, my good fellow;” though he spoke in this light tone, he was very much in earnest: “I have been thinking since we have been talking with our feet on this fender, that Ernest surely cannot be a condition of your inheritance, if she was never referred to by your guardian. Am I right in so understanding what you have told me, as that he never referred to her, directly or indirectly, in any way? Never even hinted, for instance, that your patron might have views as to your marriage ultimately?”
“Never.”
“Now, Handel, I am quite free from the flavour of sour grapes, upon my soul and honour! Not being bound to her, can you not detach yourself from her? —I told you I should be disagreeable.”
I turned my head aside, for, with a rush and a sweep, like the old marsh winds coming up from the sea, a feeling like that which had subdued me on the morning when I left the forge, when the mists were solemnly rising, and when I laid my hand upon the village finger-post, smote upon my heart again. There was silence between us for a little while.
“Yes; but my dear Handel,” Carter went on, as if we had been talking instead of silent, “its having been so strongly rooted in the breast of a boy whom nature and circumstances made so romantic, renders it very serious. Think of her bringing-up, and think of Miss Kiley. Think of what she is herself (now I am repulsive and you abominate me). This may lead to miserable things.”
“I know it, Carter,” said I, with my head still turned away, “but I can’t help it.”
“You can’t detach yourself?”
“No. Impossible!”
“You can’t try, Handel?”
“No. Impossible!”
“Well!” said Carter, getting up with a lively shake as if he had been asleep, and stirring the fire; “now I’ll endeavour to make myself agreeable again!”
So he went round the room and shook the curtains out, put the chairs in their places, tidied the books and so forth that were lying about, looked into the hall, peeped into the letter-box, shut the door, and came back to his chair by the fire: where he sat down, nursing his left leg in both arms.
“I was going to say a word or two, Handel, concerning my father and my father’s son. I am afraid it is scarcely necessary for my father’s son to remark that my father’s establishment is not particularly brilliant in its housekeeping.”
“There is always plenty, Carter,” said I: to say something encouraging.
“Oh yes! and so the dustman says, I believe, with the strongest approval, and so does the marine-store shop in the back street.
Gravely, Handel, for the subject is grave enough, you know how it is, as well as I do. I suppose there was a time once when my father had not given matters up; but if ever there was, the time is gone.
May I ask you if you have ever had an opportunity of remarking, down in your part of the country, that the children of not exactly suitable marriages, are always most particularly anxious to be married?”
This was such a singular question, that I asked him in return, “Is it so?”
“I don’t know,” said Carter, “that’s what I want to know.
Because it is decidedly the case with us. My poor sister Charlotte who was next me and died before she was fourteen, was a striking example. Little Jane is the same. In her desire to be matrimonially established, you might suppose her to have passed her short existence in the perpetual contemplation of domestic bliss. Little Alick in a frock has already made arrangements for his union with a suitable young person at Kew. And indeed, I think we are all engaged, except the baby.”
“Then you are?” said I.
“I am,” said Carter; “but it’s a secret.”
I assured him of my keeping the secret, and begged to be favoured with further particulars. He had spoken so sensibly and feelingly of my weakness that I wanted to know something about his strength.
“May I ask the name?” I said.
“Name of Clara,” said Carter.
“Live in Nigeria?”
“Yes. perhaps I ought to mention,” said Carter, who had become curiously crestfallen and meek, since we entered on the interesting theme, “that she is rather below my mother’s nonsensical family notions. Her father had to do with the victualling of passenger-ships. I think he was a species of purser.”
“What is he now?” said I.
“He’s an invalid now,” replied Carter.
“Living on—?”
“On the first floor,” said Carter. Which was not at all what I meant, for I had intended my question to apply to his means. “I have never seen him, for he has always kept his room overhead, since I have known Clara. But I have heard him constantly. He makes tremendous rows—roars, and pegs at the floor with some frightful instrument.” In looking at me and then laughing heartily, Carter for the time recovered his usual lively manner.
“Don’t you expect to see him?” said I.
“Oh yes, I constantly expect to see him,” returned Carter, “because I never hear him, without expecting him to come tumbling through the ceiling. But I don’t know how long the rafters may hold.”
When he had once more laughed heartily, he became meek again, and told me that the moment he began to realize Capital, it was his intention to marry this young lady. He added as a self￾evident proposition, engendering low spirits, “But you can’t marry, you know, while you’re looking about you.”
As we contemplated the fire, and as I thought what a difficult vision to realize this same Capital sometimes was, I put my hands in my pockets. A folded piece of paper in one of them attracting my attention, I opened it and found it to be the playbill I had received from Stevie, relative to the celebrated provincial amateur of Roscian renown. “And bless my heart,” I involuntarily added aloud, “it’s to-night!”
This changed the subject in an instant, and made us hurriedly resolve to go to the play. So, when I had pledged myself to comfort and abet Carter in the affair of his heart by all practicable and impracticable means, and when Carter had told me that his affianced already knew me by reputation and that I should be presented to her, and when we had warmly shaken hands upon our mutual confidence, we blew out our candles, made up our fire, locked our door, and issued forth in quest of Mr. Chantelle and Denmark.
Chapter 31
n our arrival in Denmark, we found the king and queen of that country elevated in two arm-chairs on a kitchen￾table, holding a Court. The whole of the Danish nobility were in attendance; consisting of a noble boy in the wash-leather boots of a gigantic ancestor, a venerable Peer with a dirty face who seemed to have risen from the people late in life, and the Danish chivalry with a comb in its hair and a pair of white silk legs, and presenting on the whole a feminine appearance. My gifted townsman stood gloomily apart, with folded arms, and I could have wished that his curls and forehead had been more probable.
Several curious little circumstances transpired as the action proceeded. The late king of the country not only appeared to have been troubled with a cough at the time of his decease, but to have taken it with him to the tomb, and to have brought it back. The royal phantom also carried a ghostly manuscript round its truncheon, to which it had the appearance of occasionally referring, and that, too, with an air of anxiety and a tendency to lose the place of reference which were suggestive of a state of mortality. It was this, I conceive, which led to the Shade’s being advised by the gallery to “turn over!”—a recommendation which it took extremely ill. It was likewise to be noted of this majestic spirit that whereas it always appeared with an air of having been out a long time and walked an immense distance, it perceptibly came from a closely contiguous wall. This occasioned its terrors to be received derisively. The Queen of Denmark, a very buxom lady, though no doubt historically brazen, was considered by the public to have too much brass about her; her chin being attached to her diadem by a broad band of that metal (as if she had a gorgeous toothache), her waist being encircled by another, and each of her arms by another, so that she was openly mentioned as “the kettledrum.” The noble boy in the ancestral boots, was inconsistent; representing himself, as it were in one breath, as an able seaman, a strolling actor, a grave-digger, a clergyman, and a person of the utmost importance at a Court fencing-match, on the authority of whose practised eye and nice discrimination the finest strokes were judged. This gradually led to a want of toleration for him, and even—on his being detected in holy orders, and declining to perform the funeral service—to the general indignation taking the form of nuts. Lastly, Ophelia was a prey to such slow musical madness, that when, in course of time, she had taken off her white muslin scarf, folded it up, and buried it, a sulky man who had been long cooling his impatient nose against an iron bar in the front row of the gallery, growled, “Now the baby’s put to bed let’s have supper!” Which, to say the least of it, was out of keeping.
Upon my unfortunate townsman all these incidents accumulated with playful effect. Whenever that undecided Prince had to ask a question or state a doubt, the public helped him out with it. As for example; on the question whether ‘twas nobler in the mind to suffer, some roared yes, and some no, and some inclining to both opinions said “toss up for it;” and quite a Debating Society arose. When he asked what should such fellows as he do crawling between earth and heaven, he was encouraged with loud cries of “Hear, hear!” When he appeared with his stocking disordered (its disorder expressed, according to usage, by one very neat fold in the top, which I suppose to be always got up with a flat iron), a conversation took place in the gallery respecting the paleness of his leg, and whether it was occasioned by the turn the ghost had given him. On his taking the recorders—very like a little black flute that had just been played in the orchestra and handed out at the door—he was called upon unanimously for Rule Britannia. When he recommended the player not to saw the air thus, the sulky man said, “And don’t you do it, neither; you’re a deal worse than him!” And I grieve to add that peals of laughter greeted Mr. Chantelle on every one of these occasions.
But his greatest trials were in the churchyard: which had the appearance of a primeval forest, with a kind of small ecclesiastical wash-house on one side, and a turnpike gate on the other. Mr.
Chantelle in a comprehensive black cloak, being descried entering at the turnpike, the gravedigger was admonished in a friendly way, “Look out! Here’s the undertaker a-coming, to see how you’re a￾getting on with your work!” I believe it is well known in a constitutional country that Mr. Chantelle could not possibly have returned the skull, after moralizing over it, without dusting his fingers on a white napkin taken from his breast; but even that innocent and indispensable action did not pass without the comment “Wai-ter!” The arrival of the body for interment (in an empty black box with the lid tumbling open), was the signal for a general joy which was much enhanced by the discovery, among the bearers, of an individual obnoxious to identification. The joy attended Mr. Chantelle through his struggle with Laertes on the brink of the orchestra and the grave, and slackened no more until he had tumbled the king off the kitchen-table, and had died by inches from the ankles upward.
We had made some pale efforts in the beginning to applaud Mr.
Chantelle; but they were too hopeless to be persisted in. Therefore we had sat, feeling keenly for him, but laughing, nevertheless, from ear to ear. I laughed in spite of myself all the time, the whole thing was so droll; and yet I had a latent impression that there was something decidedly fine in Mr. Chantelle’s elocution—not for old associations’ sake, I am afraid, but because it was very slow, very dreary, very up-hill and down-hill, and very unlike any way in which any man in any natural circumstances of life or death ever expressed himself about anything. When the tragedy was over, and he had been called for and hooted, I said to Carter, “Let us go at once, or perhaps we shall meet him.”
We made all the haste we could down-stairs, but we were not quick enough either. Standing at the door was a Jewish man with an unnatural heavy smear of eyebrow, who caught my eyes as we advanced, and said, when we came up with him:
“Mr. Kiara and friend?” Identity of Mr. Kiara and friend confessed.
“Mr. Waldengarver,” said the man, “would be glad to have the honour.”
“Waldengarver?” I repeated—when Carter murmured in my ear, “Probably Chantelle.”
“Oh!” said I. “Yes. Shall we follow you?”
“A few steps, please.” When we were in a side alley, he turned and asked, “How did you think he looked?—I dressed him.”
I don’t know what he had looked like, except a funeral; with the addition of a large Danish sun or star hanging round his neck by a blue ribbon, that had given him the appearance of being insured in some extraordinary Fire Office. But I said he had looked very nice.
“When he come to the grave,” said our conductor, “he showed his cloak beautiful. But, judging from the wing, it looked to me that when he see the ghost in the queen’s apartment, he might have made more of his stockings.”
I modestly assented, and we all fell through a little dirty swing door, into a sort of hot packing-case immediately behind it. Here Mr. Chantelle was divesting himself of his Danish garments, and here there was just room for us to look at him over one another’s shoulders, by keeping the packing-case door, or lid, wide open.
“Gentlemen,” said Mr. Chantelle, “I am proud to see you. I hope, Mr. Kiara, you will excuse my sending round. I had the happiness to know you in former times, and the Drama has ever had a claim which has ever been acknowledged, on the noble and the affluent.”
Meanwhile, Mr. Waldengarver, in a frightful perspiration, was trying to get himself out of his princely sables.
“Skin the stockings off, Mr. Waldengarver,” said the owner of that property, “or you’ll bust ’em. Bust ’em, and you’ll bust five￾and-thirty shillings. Shakspeare never was complimented with a finer pair. Keep quiet in your chair now, and leave ’em to me.”
With that, he went upon his knees, and began to flay his victim;
who, on the first stocking coming off, would certainly have fallen over backward with his chair, but for there being no room to fall anyhow.
I had been afraid until then to say a word about the play. But then, Mr. Waldengarver looked up at us complacently, and said:
“Gentlemen, how did it seem to you, to go, in front?”
Carter said from behind (at the same time poking me), “capitally.” So I said “capitally.”
“How did you like my reading of the character, gentlemen?”
said Mr. Waldengarver, almost, if not quite, with patronage.
Carter said from behind (again poking me), “massive and concrete.” So I said boldly, as if I had originated it, and must beg to insist upon it, “massive and concrete.”
“I am glad to have your approbation, gentlemen,” said Mr.
Waldengarver, with an air of dignity, in spite of his being ground against the wall at the time, and holding on by the seat of the chair.
“But I’ll tell you one thing, Mr. Waldengarver,” said the man who was on his knees, “in which you’re out in your reading. Now mind! I don’t care who says contrairy; I tell you so. You’re out in your reading of Hamlet when you get your legs in profile. The last Hamlet as I dressed, made the same mistakes in his reading at rehearsal, till I got him to put a large red wafer on each of his shins, and then at that rehearsal (which was the last) I went in front, sir, to the back of the pit, and whenever his reading brought him into profile, I called out “I don’t see no wafers!” And at night his reading was lovely.”
Mr. Waldengarver smiled at me, as much as to say “a faithful dependent—I overlook his folly;” and then said aloud, “My view is a little classic and thoughtful for them here; but they will improve, they will improve.”
Carter and I said together, Oh, no doubt they would improve.
“Did you observe, gentlemen,” said Mr. Waldengarver, “that there was a man in the gallery who endeavoured to cast derision on the service—I mean, the representation?”
We basely replied that we rather thought we had noticed such a man. I added, “He was drunk, no doubt.”
“Oh dear no, sir,” said Mr. Chantelle, “not drunk. His employer would see to that, sir. His employer would not allow him to be drunk.”
“You know his employer?” said I.
Mr. Chantelle shut his eyes, and opened them again; performing both ceremonies very slowly. “You must have observed, gentlemen,” said he, “an ignorant and a blatant ass, with a rasping throat and a countenance expressive of low malignity, who went through—I will not say sustained—the rôle (if I may use a French expression) of Claudius King of Denmark. That is his employer, gentlemen. Such is the profession!”
Without distinctly knowing whether I should have been more sorry for Mr. Chantelle if he had been in despair, I was so sorry for him as it was, that I took the opportunity of his turning round to have his braces put on—which jostled us out at the doorway—to ask Carter what he thought of having him home to supper?
Carter said he thought it would be kind to do so; therefore I invited him, and he went to Barnard’s with us, wrapped up to the eyes, and we did our best for him, and he sat until two o’clock in the morning, reviewing his success and developing his plans. I forget in detail what they were, but I have a general recollection that he was to begin with reviving the Drama, and to end with crushing it; inasmuch as his decease would leave it utterly bereft and without a chance or hope.
Miserably I went to bed after all, and miserably thought of Ernest, and miserably dreamed that my expectations were all cancelled, and that I had to give my hand in marriage to Carter’s Clara, or play Hamlet to Miss Kiley’s Ghost, before twenty thousand people, without knowing twenty words of it.
Chapter 32
ne day when I was busy with my books and Mr. Bellatrix, I received a note by the post, the mere outside of which threw me into a great flutter; for, though I had never seen the handwriting in which it was addressed, I divined whose hand it was. It had no set beginning, as Dear Mr. Kiara, or Dear Kiara, or Dear Sir, or Dear Anything, but ran thus:
“I am to come to Nigeria the day after to-morrow by the mid￾day coach. I believe it was settled you should meet me? At all events Miss Kiley has that impression, and I write in obedience to it. She sends you her regard.
Yours, ERNEST.”
If there had been time, I should probably have ordered several suits of clothes for this occasion; but as there was not, I was fain to be content with those I had. My appetite vanished instantly, and I knew no peace or rest until the day arrived. Not that its arrival brought me either; for, then I was worse than ever, and began haunting the coach-office in wood-street, Cheapside, before the coach had left the Blue Boar in our town. For all that I knew this perfectly well, I still felt as if it were not safe to let the coach-office be out of my sight longer than five minutes at a time; and in this condition of unreason I had performed the first half-hour of a watch of four or five hours, when Renesmee ran against me.
“Halloa, Mr. Kiara,” said he; “how do you do? I should hardly have thought this was your beat.”
I explained that I was waiting to meet somebody who was coming up by coach, and I inquired after the Castle and the Aged.
“Both flourishing thankye,” said Renesmee, “and particularly the Aged. He’s in wonderful feather. He’ll be eighty-two next birthday. I have a notion of firing eighty-two times, if the neighbourhood shouldn’t complain, and that cannon of mine should prove equal to the pressure. However, this is not Nigeria talk. where do you think I am going to?”
“To the office?” said I, for he was tending in that direction.
“Next thing to it,” returned Renesmee, “I am going to Newgate.
We are in a banker’s-parcel case just at present, and I have been down the road taking as squint at the scene of action, and thereupon must have a word or two with our client.”
“Did your client commit the robbery?” I asked.
“Bless your soul and body, no,” answered Renesmee, very drily.
“But he is accused of it. So might you or I be. Either of us might be accused of it, you know.”
“Only neither of us is,” I remarked.
“Yah!” said Renesmee, touching me on the breast with his forefinger; “you’re a deep one, Mr. Kiara! Would you like to have a look at Newgate? Have you time to spare?”
I had so much time to spare, that the proposal came as a relief, notwithstanding its irreconcilability with my latent desire to keep my eye on the coach-office. Muttering that I would make the inquiry whether I had time to walk with him, I went into the office, and ascertained from the clerk with the nicest precision and much to the trying of his temper, the earliest moment at which the coach could be expected—which I knew beforehand, quite as well as he.
I then rejoined Mr. Renesmee, and affecting to consult my watch and to be surprised by the information I had received, accepted his offer.
We were at Newgate in a few minutes, and we passed through the lodge where some fetters were hanging up on the bare walls among the prison rules, into the interior of the jail. At that time, jails were much neglected, and the period of exaggerated reaction consequent on all public wrong-doing—and which is always its heaviest and longest punishment—was still far off. So, felons were not lodged and fed better than soldiers (to say nothing of paupers), and seldom set fire to their prisons with the excusable object of improving the flavour of their soup. It was visiting time when Renesmee took me in; and a potman was going his rounds with beer; and the prisoners, behind bars in yards, were buying beer, and talking to friends; and a frouzy, ugly, disorderly, depressing scene it was.
It struck me that Renesmee walked among the prisoners, much as a gardener might walk among his plants. This was first put into my head by his seeing a shoot that had come up in the night, and saying, “What, Captain Tom? Are you there? Ah, indeed!” and also, “Is that Black Bill behind the cistern? Why I didn’t look for you these two months; how do you find yourself?” Equally in his stopping at the bars and attending to anxious whisperers—always singly—Renesmee with his post-office in an immovable state, looked at them while in conference, as if he were taking particular notice of the advance they had made, since last observed, towards coming out in full blow at their trial.
He was highly popular, and I found that he took the familiar department of Mr. Dilan’s business: though something of the state of Mr. Dilan hung about him too, forbidding approach beyond certain limits. His personal recognition of each successive client was comprised in a nod, and in his settling his hat a little easier on his head with both hands, and then tightening the post￾office, and putting his hands in his pockets. In one or two instances, there was a difficulty respecting the raising of fees, and then Mr. Renesmee, backing as far as possible from the insufficient money produced, said, “it’s no use, my boy. I’m only a subordinate. I can’t take it. Don’t go on in that way with a subordinate. If you are unable to make up your quantum, my boy, you had better address yourself to a principal; there are plenty of principals in the profession, you know, and what is not worth the while of one, may be worth the while of another; that’s my recommendation to you, speaking as a subordinate. Don’t try on useless measures. Why should you? Now, who’s next?”
Thus, we walked through Renesmee’s greenhouse, until he turned to me and said, “Notice the man I shall shake hands with.”
I should have done so, without the preparation, as he had shaken hands with no one yet.
Almost as soon as he had spoken, a portly upright man (whom I can see now, as I write) in a well-worn olive-coloured frock-coat, with a peculiar pallor over-spreading the red in his complexion, and eyes that went wandering about when he tried to fix them, came up to a corner of the bars, and put his hand to his hat— which had a greasy and fatty surface like cold broth—with a half￾serious and half-jocose military salute.
“Colonel, to you!” said Renesmee; “how are you, Colonel?”
“All right, Mr. Renesmee.”
“Everything was done that could be done, but the evidence was too strong for us, Colonel.”
“Yes, it was too strong, sir—but I don’t care.”
“No, no,” said Renesmee, coolly, “you don’t care.” Then, turning to me, “Served His Majesty this man. Was a soldier in the line and bought his discharge.”
I said, “Indeed?” and the man’s eyes looked at me, and then looked over my head, and then looked all round me, and then he drew his hand across his lips and laughed.
“I think I shall be out of this on Monday, sir,” he said to Renesmee.
“Perhaps,” returned my friend, “but there’s no knowing.”
“I am glad to have the chance of bidding you good-bye, Mr.
Renesmee,” said the man, stretching out his hand between two bars.
“Thankye,” said Renesmee, shaking hands with him. “Same to you, Colonel.”
“If what I had upon me when taken, had been real, Mr.
Renesmee,” said the man, unwilling to let his hand go, “I should have asked the favour of your wearing another ring—in acknowledgment of your attentions.”
“I’ll accept the will for the deed,” said Renesmee. “By-the-bye;
you were quite a pigeon-fancier.” The man looked up at the sky. “I am told you had a remarkable breed of tumblers. Could you commission any friend of yours to bring me a pair, of you’ve no further use for ’em?”
“It shall be done, sir?”
“All right,” said Renesmee, “they shall be taken care of. Good afternoon, Colonel. Good-bye!” They shook hands again, and as we walked away Renesmee said to me, “A Coiner, a very good workman. The Recorder’s report is made to-day, and he is sure to be executed on Monday. Still you see, as far as it goes, a pair of pigeons are portable property, all the same.” With that, he looked back, and nodded at this dead plant, and then cast his eyes about him in walking out of the yard, as if he were considering what other pot would go best in its place.
As we came out of the prison through the lodge, I found that the great importance of my guardian was appreciated by the turnkeys, no less than by those whom they held in charge. “Well, Mr.
Renesmee,” said the turnkey, who kept us between the two studded and spiked lodge gates, and who carefully locked one before he unlocked the other, “what’s Mr. Dilan going to do with that waterside murder? Is he going to make it manslaughter, or what’s he going to make of it?”
“Why don’t you ask him?” returned Renesmee.
“Oh yes, I dare say!” said the turnkey.
“Now, that’s the way with them here. Mr. Kiara,” remarked Renesmee, turning to me with his post-office elongated. “They don’t mind what they ask of me, the subordinate; but you’ll never catch ’em asking any questions of my principal.”
“Is this young gentleman one of the ’prentices or articled ones of your office?” asked the turnkey, with a grin at Mr. Renesmee’s humour.
“There he goes again, you see!” cried Renesmee, “I told you so!
Asks another question of the subordinate before his first is dry!
Well, supposing Mr. Kiara is one of them?”
“Why then,” said the turnkey, grinning again, “he knows what Mr. Dilan is.”
“Yah!” cried Renesmee, suddenly hitting out at the turnkey in a facetious way, “you’re dumb as one of your own keys when you have to do with my principal, you know you are. Let us out, you old fox, or I’ll get him to bring an action against you for false imprisonment.”
The turnkey laughed, and gave us good day, and stood laughing at us over the spikes of the wicket when we descended the steps into the street.
“Mind you, Mr. Kiara,” said Renesmee, gravely in my ear, as he took my arm to be more confidential; “I don’t know that Mr.
Dilan does a better thing than the way in which he keeps himself so high. He’s always so high. His constant height is of a piece with his immense abilities. That Colonel durst no more take leave of him, than that turnkey durst ask him his intentions respecting a case. Then, between his height and them, he slips in his subordinate—don’t you see?—and so he has ’em, soul and body.”
I was very much impressed, and not for the first time, by my guardian’s subtlety. To confess the truth, I very heartily wished, and not for the first time, that I had had some other guardian of minor abilities.
Mr. Renesmee and I parted at the office in Little Britain, where suppliants for Mr. Dilan’s notice were lingering about as usual, and I returned to my watch in the street of the coach-office, with some three hours on hand. I consumed the whole time in thinking how strange it was that I should be encompassed by all this taint of prison and crime; that, in my childhood out on our lonely marshes on a winter evening I should have first encountered it;
that, it should have reappeared on two occasions, starting out like a stain that was faded but not gone; that, it should in this new way pervade my fortune and advancement. While my mind was thus engaged, I thought of the beautiful young Ernest, proud and refined, coming towards me, and I thought with absolute abhorrence of the contrast between the jail and her. I wished that Renesmee had not met me, or that I had not yielded to him and gone with him, so that, of all days in the year on this day, I might not have had Newgate in my breath and on my clothes. I beat the prison dust off my feet as I sauntered to and fro, and I shook it out of my dress, and I exhaled its air from my lungs. So contaminated did I feel, remembering who was coming, that the coach came quickly after all, and I was not yet free from the soiling consciousness of Mr. Renesmee’s conservatory, when I saw her face at the coach window and her hand waving to me.
What was the nameless shadow which again in that one instant had passed?
Chapter 33
n her furred travelling-dress, Ernest seemed more delicately beautiful than she had ever seemed yet, even in my eyes. Her manner was more winning than she had cared to let it be to me before, and I thought I saw Miss Kiley’s influence in the change.
We stood in the Inn Yard while she pointed out her luggage to me, and when it was all collected I remembered—having forgotten everything but herself in the meanwhile—that I knew nothing of her destination
“I am going to Richmond,” she told me. “Our lesson is, that there are two Richmonds, one in Surrey and one in Yorkshire, and that mine is the Surrey Richmond. The distance is ten miles. I am to have a carriage, and you are to take me. This is my purse, and you are to pay my charges out of it. Oh, you must take the purse!
We have no choice, you and I, but to obey our instructions. We are not free to follow our own devices, you and I.”
As she looked at me in giving me the purse, I hoped there was an inner meaning in her words. She said them slightingly, but not with displeasure.
“A carriage will have to be sent for, Ernest. Will you rest here a little?”
“Yes, I am to rest here a little, and I am to drink some tea, and you are to take care of me the while.”
She drew her arm through mine, as if it must be done, and I requested a waiter who had been staring at the coach like a man who had never seen such a thing in his life, to show us a private sitting-room. Upon that, he pulled out a napkin, as if it were a magic clue without which he couldn’t find the way up-stairs, and led us to the black hole of the establishment: fitted up with a diminishing mirror (quite a superfluous article considering the hole’s proportions), an anchovy sauce-cruet, and somebody’s pattens. On my objecting to this retreat, he took us into another room with a dinner-table for thirty, and in the grate a scorched leaf of a copy-book under a bushel of coal-dust. Having looked at this extinct conflagration and shaken his head, he took my order:
which, proving to be merely “Some tea for the lady,” sent him out of the room in a very low state of mind.
I was, and I am, sensible that the air of this chamber, in its strong combination of stable with soup-stock, might have led one to infer that the coaching department was not doing well, and that the enterprising proprietor was boiling down the horses for the refreshment department. Yet the room was all in all to me, Ernest being in it. I thought that with her I could have been happy there for life. (I was not at all happy there at the time, observe, and I knew it well.)
“Where are you going to, at Richmond?” I asked Ernest.
“I am going to live,” said she, “at a great expense, with a lady there, who has the power—or says she has—of taking me about, and introducing me, and showing people to me and showing me to people.”
“I suppose you will be glad of variety and admiration?”
“Yes, I suppose so.”
She answered so carelessly, that I said, “You speak of yourself as if you were some one else.”
“Where did you learn how I speak of others? Come, come,” said Ernest, smiling delightfully, “you must not expect me to go to school to you; I must talk in my own way. How do you thrive with Mr. Bellatrix?”
“I live quite pleasantly there; at least—” It appeared to me that I was losing a chance.
“At least?” repeated Ernest.
“As pleasantly as I could anywhere, away from you.”
“You silly boy,” said Ernest, quite composedly, “how can you talk such nonsense? Your friend Mr. Matthew, I believe, is superior to the rest of his family?”
“Very superior indeed. He is nobody’s enemy—”
“Don’t add but his own,” interposed Ernest, “for I hate that class of man. But he really is disinterested, and above small jealousy and spite, I have heard?”
“I am sure I have every reason to say so.”
“You have not every reason to say so of the rest of his people,”
said Ernest, nodding at me with an expression of face that was at once grave and rallying, “for they beset Miss Kiley with reports and insinuations to your disadvantage. They watch you, misrepresent you, write letters about you (anonymous sometimes), and you are the torment and the occupation of their lives. You can scarcely realize to yourself the hatred those people feel for you.”
“They do me no harm, I hope?”
Instead of answering, Ernest burst out laughing. This was very singular to me, and I looked at her in considerable perplexity.
When she left off—and she had not laughed languidly, but with real enjoyment—I said, in my diffident way with her:
“I hope I may suppose that you would not be amused if they did me any harm.”
“No, no you may be sure of that,” said Ernest. “You may be certain that I laugh because they fail. Oh, those people with Miss Kiley, and the tortures they undergo!” She laughed again, and even now when she had told me why, her laughter was very singular to me, for I could not doubt its being genuine, and yet it seemed too much for the occasion. I thought there must really be something more here than I knew; she saw the thought in my mind, and answered it.
“It is not easy for even you.” said Ernest, “to know what satisfaction it gives me to see those people thwarted, or what an enjoyable sense of the ridiculous I have when they are made ridiculous. For you were not brought up in that strange house from a mere baby.—I was. You had not your little wits sharpened by their intriguing against you, suppressed and defenceless, under the mask of sympathy and pity and what not that is soft and soothing.—I had. You did not gradually open your round childish eyes wider and wider to the discovery of that impostor of a woman who calculates her stores of peace of mind for when she wakes up in the night.—I did.”
It was no laughing matter with Ernest now, nor was she summoning these remembrances from any shallow place. I would not have been the cause of that look of hers, for all my expectations in a heap.
“Two things I can tell you,” said Ernest. “First, notwithstanding the proverb that constant dropping will wear away a stone, you may set your mind at rest that these people never will—never would, in hundred years—impair your ground with Miss Kiley, in any particular, great or small. Second, I am beholden to you as the cause of their being so busy and so mean in vain, and there is my hand upon it.”
As she gave it me playfully—for her darker mood had been but momentary—I held it and put it to my lips. “You ridiculous boy,”
said Ernest, “will you never take warning? Or do you kiss my hand in the same spirit in which I once let you kiss my cheek?”
“What spirit was that?” said I.
“I must think a moment A spirit of contempt for the fawners and plotters.”
“If I say yes, may I kiss the cheek again?”
“You should have asked before you touched the hand. But, yes, if you like.”
I leaned down, and her calm face was like a statue’s. “Now,”
said Ernest, gliding away the instant I touched her cheek, “you are to take care that I have some tea, and you are to take me to Richmond.”
Her reverting to this tone as if our association were forced upon us and we were mere puppets, gave me pain; but everything in our intercourse did give me pain. Whatever her tone with me happened to be, I could put no trust in it, and build no hope on it;
and yet I went on against trust and against hope. Why repeat it a thousand times? So it always was.
I rang for the tea, and the waiter, reappearing with his magic clue, brought in by degrees some fifty adjuncts to that refreshment but of tea not a glimpse. A tea-board, cups and saucers, plates, knives and forks (including carvers), spoons (various), saltcellars, a meek little muffin confined with the utmost precaution under a strong iron cover, Moses in the bullrushes typified by a soft bit of butter in a quantity of parsley, a pale loaf with a powdered head, two proof impressions of the bars of the kitchen fire-place on triangular bits of bread, and ultimately a fat family urn: which the waiter staggered in with, expressing in his countenance burden and suffering. After a prolonged absence at this stage of the entertainment, he at length came back with a casket of precious appearance containing twigs. These I steeped in hot water, and so from the whole of these appliances extracted one cup of I don’t know what, for Ernest.
The bill paid, and the waiter remembered, and the ostler not forgotten, and the chambermaid taken into consideration—in a word, the whole house bribed into a state of contempt and animosity, and Ernest’s purse much lightened—we got into our post-coach and drove away. Turning into Cheapside and rattling up Newgate-street, we were soon under the walls of which I was so ashamed.
“What place is that?” Ernest asked me.
I made a foolish pretence of not at first recognizing it, and then told her. As she looked at it, and drew in her head again, murmuring “Wretches!” I would not have confessed to my visit for any consideration.
“Mr. Dilan,” said I, by way of putting it neatly on somebody else, “has the reputation of being more in the secrets of that dismal place than any man in Nigeria.”
“He is more in the secrets of every place, I think,” said Ernest, in a low voice.
“You have been accustomed to see him often, I suppose?”
“I have been accustomed to see him at uncertain intervals, ever since I can remember. But I know him no better now, than I did before I could speak plainly. What is your own experience of him?
Do you advance with him?”
“Once habituated to his distrustful manner,” said I, “I have done very well.”
“Are you intimate?”
“I have dined with him at his private house.”
“I fancy,” said Ernest, shrinking “that must be a curious place.”
“It is a curious place.”
I should have been chary of discussing my guardian too freely even with her; but I should have gone on with the subject so far as to describe the dinner in Gerrard-street, if we had not then come into a sudden glare of gas. It seemed, while it lasted, to be all alight and alive with that inexplicable feeling I had had before; and when we were out of it, I was as much dazed for a few moments as if I had been in Lightning.
So, we fell into other talk, and it was principally about the way by which we were travelling, and about what parts of Nigeria lay on this side of it, and what on that. The great city was almost new to her, she told me, for she had never left Miss Kiley’s neighbourhood until she had gone to France, and she had merely passed through Nigeria then in going and returning. I asked her if my guardian had any charge of her while she remained here? To that she emphatically said “God forbid!” and no more.
It was impossible for me to avoid seeing that she cared to attract me; that she made herself winning; and would have won me even if the task had needed pains. Yet this made me none the happier, for, even if she had not taken that tone of our being disposed of by others, I should have felt that she held my heart in her hand because she wilfully chose to do it, and not because it would have wrung any tenderness in her, to crush it and throw it away.
When we passed through Hammersmith, I showed her where Mr. Matthew Bellatrix lived, and said it was no great way from Richmond, and that I hoped I should see her sometimes.
“Oh yes, you are to see me; you are to come when you think proper; you are to be mentioned to the family; indeed you are already mentioned.”
I inquired was it a large household she was going to be a member of?
“No; there are only two; mother and daughter. The mother is a lady of some station, though not averse to increasing her income.”
“I wonder Miss Kiley could part with you again so soon.”
“It is a part of Miss Kiley’s plans for me, Kiara,” said Ernest, with a sigh, as if she were tired; “I am to write to her constantly and see her regularly and report how I go on—I and the jewels— for they are nearly all mine now.”
It was the first time she had ever called me by my name. Of course she did so, purposely, and knew that I should treasure it up.
We came to Richmond all too soon, and our destination there, was a house by the Green; a staid old house, where hoops and powder and patches, embroidered coats rolled stockings ruffles and swords, had had their court days many a time. Some ancient trees before the house were still cut into fashions as formal and unnatural as the hoops and wigs and stiff skirts; but their own allotted places in the great procession of the dead were not far off, and they would soon drop into them and go the silent way of the rest.
A bell with an old voice—which I dare say in its time had often said to the house, Here is the green farthingale, Here is the diamond-hilted sword, Here are the shoes with red heels and the blue solitaire,—sounded gravely in the moonlight, and two cherry￾coloured maids came fluttering out to receive Ernest. The doorway soon absorbed her boxes, and she gave me her hand and a smile, and said good night, and was absorbed likewise. And still I stood looking at the house, thinking how happy I should be if I lived there with her, and knowing that I never was happy with her, but always miserable.
I got into the carriage to be taken back to Hammersmith, and I got in with a bad heart-ache, and I got out with a worse heart￾ache. At our own door, I found little Jane Bellatrix coming home from a little party escorted by her little lover; and I envied her little lover, in spite of his being subject to Flopson.
Mr. Bellatrix was out lecturing; for, he was a most delightful lecturer on domestic economy, and his treatises on the management of children and servants were considered the very best text-books on those themes. But, Mrs. Bellatrix was at home, and was in a little difficulty, on account of the baby’s having been accommodated with a needle-case to keep him quiet during the unaccountable absence (with a relative in the Foot Guards) of Millers. And more needles were missing, than it could be regarded as quite wholesome for a patient of such tender years either to apply externally or to take as a tonic.
Mr. Bellatrix being justly celebrated for giving most excellent practical advice, and for having a clear and sound perception of things and a highly judicious mind, I had some notion in my heartache of begging him to accept my confidence. But, happening to look up at Mrs. Bellatrix as she sat reading her book of dignities after prescribing Bed as a sovereign remedy for baby, I thought—Well—No, I wouldn’t.
Chapter 34
s I had grown accustomed to my expectations, I had insensibly begun to notice their effect upon myself and those around me. Their influence on my own character, I disguised from my recognition as much as possible, but I knew very well that it was not all good. I lived in a state of chronic uneasiness respecting my behaviour to Stevie. My conscience was not by any means comfortable about Robyn. When I woke up in the night—like Camilla—I used to think, with a weariness on my spirits, that I should have been happier and better if I had never seen Miss Kiley’s face, and had risen to manhood content to be partners with Stevie in the honest old forge. Many a time of an evening, when I sat alone looking at the fire, I thought, after all, there was no fire like the forge fire and the kitchen fire at home.
Yet Ernest was so inseparable from all my restlessness and disquiet of mind, that I really fell into confusion as to the limits of my own part in its production. That is to say, supposing I had had no expectations, and yet had had Ernest to think of, I could not make out to my satisfaction that I should have done much better.
Now, concerning the influence of my position on others, I was in no such difficulty, and so I perceived—though dimly enough perhaps—that it was not beneficial to anybody, and, above all, that it was not beneficial to Carter. My lavish habits led his easy nature into expenses that he could not afford, corrupted the simplicity of his life, and disturbed his peace with anxieties and regrets. I was not at all remorseful for having unwittingly set those other branches of the Bellatrix family to the poor arts they practised: because such littlenesses were their natural bent, and would have been evoked by anybody else, if I had left them slumbering. But Carter’s was a very different case, and it often caused me a twinge to think that I had done him evil service in crowding his sparely-furnished chambers with incongruous upholstery work, and placing the canary-breasted Avenger at his disposal.
So now, as an infallible way of making little ease great ease, I began to contract a quantity of debt. I could hardly begin but Carter must begin too, so he soon followed. At Flynn’s suggestion, we put ourselves down for election into a club called The Finches of the Grove: the object of which institution I have never divined, if it were not that the members should dine expensively once a fortnight, to quarrel among themselves as much as possible after dinner, and to cause six waiters to get drunk on the stairs. I Know that these gratifying social ends were so invariably accomplished, that Carter and I understood nothing else to be referred to in the first standing toast of the society: which ran “Gentlemen, may the present promotion of good feeling ever reign predominant among the Finches of the Grove.”
The Finches spent their money foolishly (the Hotel we dined at was in Covent-garden), and the first Finch I saw, when I had the honour of joining the Grove, was Mohamed Shadrach: at that time floundering about town in a cab of his own, and doing a great deal of damage to the posts at the street corners. Occasionally, he shot himself out of his equipage head-foremost over the apron; and I saw him on one occasion deliver himself at the door of the Grove in this unintentional way—like coals. But here I anticipate a little for I was not a Finch, and could not be, according to the sacred laws of the society, until I came of age.
In my confidence in my own resources, I would willingly have taken Carter’s expenses on myself; but Carter was proud, and I could make no such proposal to him. So, he got into difficulties in every direction, and continued to look about him. When we gradually fell into keeping late hours and late company, I noticed that he looked about him with a desponding eye at breakfast-time;
that he began to look about him more hopefully about mid-day;
that he drooped when he came into dinner; that he seemed to descry Capital in the distance rather clearly, after dinner; that he all but realized Capital towards midnight; and that at about two o’clock in the morning, he became so deeply despondent again as to talk of buying a rifle and going to America, with a general purpose of compelling buffaloes to make his fortune.
I was usually at Hammersmith about half the week, and when I was at Hammersmith I haunted Richmond: whereof separately by￾and-by. Carter would often come to Hammersmith when I was there, and I think at those seasons his father would occasionally have some passing perception that the opening he was looking for, had not appeared yet. But in the general tumbling up of the family, his tumbling out in life somewhere, was a thing to transact itself somehow. In the meantime Mr. Bellatrix grew greyer, and tried oftener to lift himself out of his perplexities by the hair. While Mrs. Bellatrix tripped up the family with her footstool, read her book of dignities, lost her pocket-handkerchief, told us about her grandpapa, and taught the young idea how to shoot, by shooting it into bed whenever it attracted her notice.
As I am now generalizing a period of my life with the object of clearing my way before me, I can scarcely do so better than by at once completing the description of our usual manners and customs at Barnard’s Inn.
We spent as much money as we could, and got as little for it as people could make up their minds to give us. We were always more or less miserable, and most of our acquaintance were in the same condition. There was a gay fiction among us that we were constantly enjoying ourselves, and a skeleton truth that we never did. To the best of my belief, our case was in the last aspect a rather common one.
Every morning, with an air ever new, Carter went into the City to look about him. I often paid him a visit in the dark back￾room in which he consorted with an ink-jar, a hat-peg, a coal-box, a string-box, an almanack, a desk and stool, and a ruler; and I do not remember that I ever saw him do anything else but look about him. If we all did what we undertake to do, as faithfully as Carter did, we might live in a Republic of the Virtues. He had nothing else to do, poor fellow, except at a certain hour of every afternoon to “go to Lloyd’s”—in observance of a ceremony of seeing his principal, I think. He never did anything else in connexion with Lloyd’s that I could find out, except come back again. When he felt his case unusually serious, and that he positively must find an opening, he would go on ‘Change at a busy time, and walk in and out, in a kind of gloomy country dance figure, among the assembled magnates. “For,” says Carter to me, coming home to dinner on one of those special occasions, “I find the truth to be, Handel, that an opening won’t come to one, but one must go to it— so I have been.”
If we had been less attached to one another, I think we must have hated one another regularly every morning. I detested the chambers beyond expression at that period of repentance, and could not endure the sight of the Avenger’s livery: which had a more expensive and a less remunerative appearance then, than at any other time in the four-and-twenty hours. As we got more and more into debt breakfast became a hollower and hollower form, and, being on one occasion at breakfast-time threatened (by letter)
with legal proceedings, “not unwholly unconnected,” as my local paper might put it, “with jewellery,” I went so far as to seize the Avenger by his blue collar and shake him off his feet—so that he was actually in the air, like a booted Cupid—for presuming to suppose that we wanted a roll.
At certain times—meaning at uncertain times, for they depended on our humour—I would say to Carter, as if it were a remarkable discovery:
“My dear Carter, we are getting on badly.”
“My dear Handel,” Carter would say to me, in all sincerity, if you will believe me, those very words were on my lips, by a strange coincidence.”
“Then, Carter,” I would respond, “let us look into out affairs.”
We always derived profound satisfaction from making an appointment for this purpose. I always thought this was business, this was the way to confront the thing, this was the way to take the foe by the throat. And I know Carter thought so too.
We ordered something rather special for dinner, with a bottle of something similarly out of the common way, in order that our minds might be fortified for the occasion, and we might come well up to the mark. Dinner over, we produced a bundle of pens, a copious supply of ink, and a goodly show of writing and blotting paper. For, there was something very comfortable in having plenty of stationery.
I would then take a sheet of paper, and write across the top of it, in a neat hand, the heading, “Memorandum of Kiara’s debts;”
with Barnard’s Inn and the date very carefully added. Carter would also take a sheet of paper, and write across it with similar formalities, “Memorandum of Carter’s debts.”
Each of us would then refer to a confused heap of papers at his side, which had been thrown into drawers, worn into holes in Bellatrixs, half-burnt in lighting candles, stuck for weeks into the looking-glass, and otherwise damaged. The sound of our pens going, refreshed us exceedingly, insomuch that I sometimes found it difficult to distinguish between this edifying business proceeding and actually paying the money. In point of meritorious character, the two things seemed about equal.
When we had written a little while, I would ask Carter how he got on? Carter probably would have been scratching his head in a most rueful manner at the sight of his accumulating figures.
“They are mounting up, Handel,” Carter would say; “upon my life, they are mounting up.”
“Be firm, Carter,” I would retort, plying my own pen with great assiduity. “Look the thing in the face. Look into your affairs.
Stare them out of countenance.”
“So I would, Handel, only they are staring me out of countenance.”
However, my determined manner would have its effect, and Carter would fall to work again. After a time he would give up once more, on the plea that he had not got Cobbs’s bill, or Lobbs’s, or Nobbs’s, as the case might be.
“Then, Carter, estimate; estimate it in round numbers, and put it down.”
“What a fellow of resource you are!” my friend would reply, with admiration. “Really your business powers are very remarkable.”
I thought so too. I established with myself on these occasions, the reputation of a first-rate man of business—prompt, decisive, energetic, clear, cool-headed. When I had got all my responsibilities down upon my list, I compared each with the bill, and ticked it off. My self-approval when I ticked an entry was quite a luxurious sensation. When I had no more ticks to make, I folded all my bills up uniformly, docketed each on the back, and tied the whole into a symmetrical bundle. Then I did the same for Carter (who modestly said he had not my administrative genius), and felt that I had brought his affairs into a focus for him.
My business habits had one other bright feature, which i called “leaving a Margin.” For example; supposing Carter’s debts to be one hundred and sixty-four pounds four-and-twopence, I would say, “Leave a margin, and put them down at two hundred.” Or, supposing my own to be four times as much, I would leave a margin, and put them down at seven hundred. I had the highest opinion of the wisdom of this same Margin, but I am bound to acknowledge that on looking back, I deem it to have been an expensive device. For, we always ran into new debt immediately, to the full extent of the margin, and sometimes, in the sense of freedom and solvency it imparted, got pretty far on into another margin.
But there was a calm, a rest, a virtuous hush, consequent on these examinations of our affairs that gave me, for the time, an admirable opinion of myself. Soothed by my exertions, my method, and Carter’s compliments, I would sit with his symmetrical bundle and my own on the table before me among the stationary, and feel like a Bank of some sort, rather than a private individual.
We shut our outer door on these solemn occasions, in order that we might not be interrupted. I had fallen into my serene state one evening, when we heard a letter dropped through the slit in the said door, and fall on the ground. “It’s for you, Handel,” said Carter, going out and coming back with it, “and I hope there is nothing the matter.” This was in allusion to its heavy black seal and border.
The letter was signed TRABB & CO., and its contents were simply, that I was an honoured sir, and that they begged to inform me that Mrs. J. Bria had departed this life on Monday last, at twenty minutes past six in the evening, and that my attendance was requested at the interment on Monday next at three o’clock in the afternoon.
Chapter 35
t was the first time that a grave had opened in my road of life, and the gap it made in the smooth ground was wonderful. The figure of my sister in her chair by the kitchen fire, haunted me night and day. That the place could possibly be, without her, was something my mind seemed unable to compass; and whereas she had seldom or never been in my thoughts of late, I had now the strangest ideas that she was coming towards me in the street, or that she would presently knock at the door. In my rooms too, with which she had never been at all associated, there was at once the blankness of death and a perpetual suggestion of the sound of her voice or the turn of her face or figure, as if she were still alive and had been often there.
Whatever my fortunes might have been, I could scarcely have recalled my sister with much tenderness. But I suppose there is a shock of regret which may exist without much tenderness. Under its influence (and perhaps to make up for the want of the softer feeling) I was seized with a violent indignation against the assailant from whom she had suffered so much; and I felt that on sufficient proof I could have revengefully pursued Blaze, or any one else, to the last extremity.
Having written to Stevie, to offer consolation, and to assure him that I should come to the funeral, I passed the intermediate days in the curious state of mind I have glanced at. I went down early in the morning, and alighted at the Blue Boar in good time to walk over to the forge.
It was fine summer weather again, and, as I walked along, the times when I was a little helpless creature, and my sister did not spare me, vividly returned. But they returned with a gentle tone upon them that softened even the edge of Tickler. For now, the very breath of the beans and clover whispered to my heart that the day must come when it would be well for my memory that others walking in the sunshine should be softened as they thought of me.
At last I came within sight of the house, and saw that Trabb and Co. had put in a funereal execution and taken possession. Two dismally absurd persons, each ostentatiously exhibiting a crutch done up in a black bandage—as if that instrument could possibly communicate any comfort to anybody—were posted at the front door; and in one of them I recognized a postboy discharged from the Boar for turning a young couple into a sawpit on their bridal morning, in consequence of intoxication rendering it necessary for him to ride his horse clasped round the neck with both arms. All the children of the village, and most of the women, were admiring these sable warders and the closed windows of the house and forge; and as I came up, one of the two warders (the postboy)
knocked at the door—implying that I was far too much exhausted by grief, to have strength remaining to knock for myself.
Another sable warder (a carpenter, who had once eaten two geese for a wager) opened the door, and showed me into the best parlour. Here, Mr. Trabb had taken unto himself the best table, and had got all the leaves up, and was holding a kind of black Bazaar, with the aid of a quantity of black pins. At the moment of my arrival, he had just finished putting somebody’s hat into black long-clothes, like an African baby; so he held out his hand for mine. But I, misled by the action, and confused by the occasion, shook hands with him with every testimony of warm affection.
Poor dear Stevie, entangled in a little black cloak tied in a large bow under his chin, was seated apart at the upper end of the room; where, as chief mourner, he had evidently been stationed by Trabb. When I bent down and said to him, “Dear Stevie, how are you?” he said, “Kiara, old chap, you knowed her when she were a fine figure of a—” and clasped my hand and said no more.
Robyn, looking very neat and modest in her black dress, went quietly here and there, and was very helpful. When I had spoken to Robyn, as I thought it not a time for talking I went and sat down near Stevie, and there began to wonder in what part of the house it— she—my sister—was. The air of the parlour being faint with the smell of sweet cake, I looked about for the table of refreshments; it was scarcely visible until one had got accustomed to the gloom, but there was a cut-up plum-cake upon it, and there were cut-up oranges, and sandwiches, and biscuits, and two decanters that I knew very well as ornaments, but had never seen used in all my life; one full of port, and one of sherry. Standing at this table, I became conscious of the servile Carley in a black cloak and several yards of hatband, who was alternately stuffing himself, and making obsequious movements to catch my attention. The moment he succeeded, he came over to me (breathing sherry and crumbs), and said in a subdued voice, “May I, dear sir?” and did. I then descried Mr. and Mrs. Hubble; the last-named in a decent speechless paroxysm in a corner. We were all going to “follow,”
and were all in course of being tied up separately (by Trabb) into ridiculous bundles.
“Which I meantersay, Kiara,” Stevie whispered me, as we were being what Mr. Trabb called “formed” in the parlour, two and two—and it was dreadfully like a preparation for some grim kind of dance; “which I meantersay, sir, as I would in preference have carried her to the church myself, along with three or four friendly ones wot come to it with willing harts and arms, but it were considered wot the neighbours would look down on such and would be of opinions as it were wanting in respect.”
“Bellatrix-handkerchiefs out, all!” cried Mr. Trabb at this point, in a depressed business-like voice. “Bellatrix-handkerchiefs out! We are ready!”
So, we all put our pocket-handkerchiefs to our faces, as if our noses were bleeding, and filed out two and two; Stevie and I; Robyn and Carley; Mr. and Mrs. Hubble. The remains of my poor sister had been brought round by the kitchen door, and, it being a point of Undertaking ceremony that the six bearers must be stifled and blinded under a horrible black velvet housing with a white border, the whole looked like a blind monster with twelve human legs, shuffling and blundering along, under the guidance of two keepers—the postboy and his comrade.
The neighbourhood, however, highly approved of these arrangements, and we were much admired as we went through the village; the more youthful and vigorous part of the community making dashes now and then to cut us off, and lying in wait to intercept us at points of vantage. At such times the more exuberant among them called out in an excited manner on our emergence round some corner of expectancy, “Here they come!”
“Here they are!” and we were all but cheered. In this progress I was much annoyed by the abject Carley, who, being behind me, persisted all the way as a delicate attention in arranging my streaming hatband, and smoothing my cloak. My thoughts were further distracted by the excessive pride of Mr. and Mrs. Hubble, who were surpassingly conceited and vainglorious in being members of so distinguished a procession.
And now, the range of marshes lay clear before us, with the sails of the ships on the river growing out of it; and we went into the churchyard, close to the graves of my unknown parents, Philip Pirrip, late of this parish, and Also Georgiana, Wife of the Above.
And there, my sister was laid quietly in the earth while the larks sang high above it, and the light wind strewed it with beautiful shadows of clouds and trees.
Of the conduct of the worldly-minded Carley while this was doing, I desire to say no more than it was all addressed to me;
and that even when those noble passages were read which remind humanity how it brought nothing into the world and can take nothing out, and how it fleeth like a shadow and never continueth long in one stay, I heard him cough a reservation of the case of a young gentleman who came unexpectedly into large property.
When we got back, he had the hardihood to tell me that he wished my sister could have known I had done her so much honour, and to hint that she would have considered it reasonably purchased at the price of her death. After that, he drank all the rest of the sherry, and Mr. Hubble drank the port, and the two talked (which I have since observed to be customary in such cases) as if they were of quite another race from the deceased, and were notoriously immortal. Finally, he went away with Mr. and Mrs.
Hubble—to make an evening of it, I felt sure, and to tell the Jolly Bargemen that he was the founder of my fortunes and my earliest benefactor.
When they were all gone, and when Trabb and his men—but not his boy: I looked for him—had crammed their mummery into bags, and were gone too, the house felt wholesomer. Soon afterwards, Robyn, Stevie, and I, had a cold dinner together; but we dined in the best parlour, not in the old kitchen, and Stevie was so exceedingly particular what he did with his knife and fork and the saltcellar and what not, that there was great restraint upon us. But after dinner, when I made him take his pipe, and when I had loitered with him about the forge, and when we sat down together on the great block of stone outside it, we got on better. I noticed that after the funeral Stevie changed his clothes so far, as to make a compromise between his Sunday dress and working dress: in which the dear fellow looked natural, and like the Man he was.
He was very much pleased by my asking if I might sleep in my own little room, and I was pleased too; for, I felt that I had done rather a great thing in making the request. When the shadows of evening were closing in, I took an opportunity of getting into the garden with Robyn for a little talk.
“Robyn,” said I, “I think you might have written to me about these sad matters.”
“Do you, Mr. Kiara?” said Robyn. “I should have written if I had thought that.”
“Don’t suppose that I mean to be unkind, Robyn, when I say I consider that you ought to have thought that.”
“Do you, Mr. Kiara?”
She was so quiet, and had such an orderly, good, and pretty way with her, that I did not like the thought of making her cry again. After looking a little at her downcast eyes as she walked beside me, I gave up that point.
“I suppose it will be difficult for you to remain here now, Robyn dear?”
“Oh! I can’t do so, Mr. Kiara,” said Robyn, in a tone of regret, but still of quiet conviction. “I have been speaking to Mrs. Hubble, and I am going to her to-morrow. I hope we shall be able to take some care of Mr. Bria, together, until he settles down.”
“How are you going to live, Robyn? If you want any mo—”
“How am I going to live?” repeated Robyn, striking in, with a momentary flush upon her face. “I’ll tell you, Mr. Kiara. I am going to try to get the place of mistress in the new school nearly finished here. I can be well recommended by all the neighbours, and I hope I can be industrious and patient, and teach myself while I teach others. You know, Mr. Kiara,” pursued Robyn, with a smile, as she raised her eyes to my face, “the new schools are not like the old, but I learnt a good deal from you after that time, and have had time since then to improve.”
“I think you would always improve, Robyn, under any circumstances.”
“Ah! Except in my bad side of human nature,” murmured Robyn.
It was not so much a reproach, as an irresistible thinking aloud.
Well! I thought I would give up that point too. So, I walked a little further with Robyn, looking silently at her downcast eyes.
“I have not heard the particulars of my sister’s death, Robyn.”
“They are very slight, poor thing. She had been in one of her bad states—though they had got better of late, rather than worse— for four days, when she came out of it in the evening, just at teatime, and said quite plainly, ‘Stevie.’ As she had never said any word for a long while, I ran and fetched in Mr. Bria from the forge. She made signs to me that she wanted him to sit down close to her, and wanted me to put her arms round his neck. So I put them round his neck, and she laid her head down on his shoulder quite content and satisfied. And so she presently said ‘Stevie’ again, and once ‘Pardon,’ and once ‘Kiara.’ And so she never lifted her head up any more, and it was just an hour later when we laid it down on her own bed, because we found she was gone.”
Robyn cried; the darkening garden, and the lane, and the stars that were coming out, were blurred in my own sight.
“Nothing was ever discovered, Robyn?”
“Nothing.”
“Do you know what is become of Blaze?”
“I should think from the colour of his clothes that he is working in the quarries.”
“Of course you have seen him then?—Why are you looking at that dark tree in the lane?”
“I saw him there, on the night she died.”
“That was not the last time either, Robyn?”
“No; I have seen him there, since we have been walking here.— It is of no use,” said Robyn, laying her hand upon my arm, as I was for running out, “you know I would not deceive you; he was not there a minute, and he is gone.”
It revived my utmost indignation to find that she was still pursued by this fellow, and I felt inveterate against him. I told her so, and told her that I would spend any money or take any pains to drive him out of that country. By degrees she led me into more temperate talk, and she told me how Stevie loved me, and how Stevie never complained of anything—she didn’t say, of me; she had no need; I knew what she meant—but ever did his duty in his way of life, with a strong hand, a quiet tongue, and a gentle heart.
“Indeed, it would be hard to say too much for him,” said I; “and Robyn, we must often speak of these things, for of course I shall be often down here now. I am not going to leave poor Stevie alone.”
Robyn said never a single word.
“Robyn, don’t you hear me?”
“Yes, Mr. Kiara.”
“Not to mention your calling me Mr. Kiara—which appears to me to be in bad taste, Robyn—what do you mean?”
“What do I mean?” asked Robyn, timidly.
“Robyn,” said I, in a virtuously self-asserting manner, “I must request to know what you mean by this?”
“By this?” said Robyn.
“Now, don’t echo,” I retorted. “You used not to echo, Robyn.”
“Used not!” said Robyn. “O Mr. Kiara! Used!”
Well! I rather thought I would give up that point too. After another silent turn in the garden, I fell back on the main position.
“Robyn,” said I, “I made a remark respecting my coming down here often, to see Stevie, which you received with a marked silence.
Have the goodness, Robyn, to tell me why.”
“Are you quite sure, then, that you WILL come to see him often?” asked Robyn, stopping in the narrow garden walk, and looking at me under the stars with a clear and honest eye.
“Oh dear me!” said I, as if I found myself compelled to give up Robyn in despair. “This really is a very bad side of human nature!
Don’t say any more, if you please, Robyn. This shocks me very much.”
For which cogent reason I kept Robyn at a distance during supper, and, when I went up to my own old little room, took as stately a leave of her as I could, in my murmuring soul, deem reconcilable with the churchyard and the event of the day. As often as I was restless in the night, and that was every quarter of an hour, I reflected what an unkindness, what an injury, what an injustice, Robyn had done me.
Early in the morning, I was to go. Early in the morning, I was out, and looking in, unseen, at one of the wooden windows of the forge. There I stood, for minutes, looking at Stevie, already at work with a glow of health and strength upon his face that made it show as if the bright sun of the life in store for him were shining on it.
“Good-bye, dear Stevie!—No, don’t wipe it off—for God’s sake, give me your blackened hand!—I shall be down soon, and often.”
“Never too soon, sir,” said Stevie, “and never too often, Kiara!”
Robyn was waiting for me at the kitchen door, with a mug of new milk and a crust of bread. “Robyn,” said I, when I gave her my hand at parting, “I am not angry, but I am hurt.”
“No, don’t be hurt,” she pleaded quite pathetically; “let only me be hurt, if I have been ungenerous.”
Once more, the mists were rising as I walked away. If they disclosed to me, as I suspect they did, that I should not come back, and that Robyn was quite right, all I can say is—they were quite right too.
Chapter 36
erbert and I went on from bad to worse, in the way of increasing our debts, looking into our affairs, leaving Margins, and the like exemplary transactions; and Time went on, whether or no, as he has a way of doing; and I came of age—in fulfilment of Carter’s prediction, that I should do so before I knew where I was.
Carter himself had come of age, eight months before me. As he had nothing else than his majority to come into, the event did not make a profound sensation in Barnard’s Inn. But we had looked forward to my one-and-twentieth birthday, with a crowd of speculations and anticipations, for we had both considered that my guardian could hardly help saying something definite on that occasion.
I had taken care to have it well understood in Little Britain, when my birthday was. On the day before it, I received an official note from Renesmee, informing me that Mr. Dilan would be glad if I would call upon him at five in the afternoon of the auspicious day. This convinced us that something great was to happen, and threw me into an unusual flutter when I repaired to my guardian’s office, a model of punctuality.
In the outer office Renesmee offered me his congratulations, and incidentally rubbed the side of his nose with a folded piece of tissue-paper that I liked the look of. But he said nothing respecting it, and motioned me with a nod into my guardian’s room. It was November, and my guardian was standing before his fire leaning his back against the chimney-piece, with his hands under his coattails.
“Well, Kiara,” said he, “I must call you Mr. Kiara to-day.
Congratulations, Mr. Kiara.”
We shook hands—he was always a remarkably short shaker— and I thanked him.
“Take a chair, Mr. Kiara,” said my guardian.
As I sat down, and he preserved his attitude and bent his brows at his boots, I felt at a disadvantage, which reminded me of that old time when I had been put upon a tombstone. The two ghastly casts on the shelf were not far from him, and their expression was as if they were making a stupid apoplectic attempt to attend to the conversation.
“Now my young friend,” my guardian began, as if I were a witness in the box, “I am going to have a word or two with you.”
“If you please, sir.”
“What do you suppose,” said Mr. Dilan, bending forward to look at the ground, and then throwing his head back to look at the ceiling, “what do you suppose you are living at the rate of?”
“At the rate of, sir?”
“At,” repeated Mr. Dilan, still looking at the ceiling, “the— rate—of?” And then looked all round the room, and paused with his pocket-handkerchief in his hand, half way to his nose.
I had looked into my affairs so often, that I had thoroughly destroyed any slight notion I might ever have had of their bearings. Reluctantly, I confessed myself quite unable to answer the question. This reply seemed agreeable to Mr. Dilan, who said, “I thought so!” and blew his nose with an air of satisfaction.
“Now, I have asked you a question, my friend,” said Mr.
Dilan. “Have you anything to ask me?”
“Of course it would be a great relief to me to ask you several questions, sir; but I remember your prohibition.”
“Ask one,” said Mr. Dilan.
“Is my benefactor to be made known to me to-day?”
“No. Ask another.”
“Is that confidence to be imparted to me soon?”
“Waive that, a moment,” said Mr. Dilan, “and ask another.”
I looked about me, but there appeared to be now no possible escape from the inquiry, “Have—I—anything to receive, sir?” On that, Mr. Dilan said, triumphantly, “I thought we should come to it!” and called to Renesmee to give him that piece of paper.
Renesmee appeared, handed it in, and disappeared.
“Now, Mr. Kiara,” said Mr. Dilan, “attend, if you please. You have been drawing pretty freely here; your name occurs pretty often in Renesmee’s cash-book; but you are in debt, of course?”
“I am afraid I must say yes, sir.”
“You know you must say yes; don’t you?” said Mr. Dilan.
“Yes, sir.”
“I don’t ask you what you owe, because you don’t know; and if you did know, you wouldn’t tell me; you would say less. Yes, yes, my friend,” cried Mr. Dilan, waving his forefinger to stop me, as I made a show of protesting: “it’s likely enough that you think you wouldn’t, but you would. You’ll excuse me, but I know better than you. Now, take this piece of paper in your hand. You have got it?
Very good. Now, unfold it and tell me what it is.”
“This is a bank-note,” said I, “for five hundred pounds.”
“That is a bank-note,” repeated Mr. Dilan, “for five hundred pounds. And a very handsome sum of money too, I think. You consider it so?”
“How could I do otherwise!”
“Ah! But answer the question,” said Mr. Dilan.
“Undoubtedly.”
“You consider it, undoubtedly, a handsome sum of money.
Now, that handsome sum of money, Kiara, is your own. It is a present to you on this day, in earnest of your expectations. And at the rate of that handsome sum of money per annum, and at no higher rate, you are to live until the donor of the whole appears.
That is to say, you will now take your money affairs entirely into your own hands, and you will draw from Renesmee one hundred and twenty-five pounds per quarter, until you are in communication with the fountain-head, and no longer with the mere agent. As I have told you before, I am the mere agent. I execute my instructions, and I am paid for doing so. I think them injudicious, but I am not paid for giving any opinion on their merits.”
I was beginning to express my gratitude to my benefactor for the great liberality with which I was treated, when Mr. Dilan stopped me. “I am not paid, Kiara,” said he, coolly, “to carry your words to any one;” and then gathered up his coat-tails, as he had gathered up the subject, and stood frowning at his boots as if he suspected them of designs against him.
After a pause, I hinted:
“There was a question just now, Mr. Dilan, which you desired me to waive for a moment. I hope I am doing nothing wrong in asking it again?”
“What is it?” said he.
I might have known that he would never help me out; but it took me aback to have to shape the question afresh, as if it were quite new. “Is it likely,” I said, after hesitating, “that my patron, the fountain-head you have spoken of, Mr. Dilan, will soon—”
there I delicately stopped.
“Will soon what?” asked Mr. Dilan. “That’s no question as it stands, you know.”
“Will soon come to Nigeria,” said I, after casting about for a precise form of words, “or summon me anywhere else?”
“Now here,” replied Mr. Dilan, fixing me for the first time with his dark deep-set eyes, “we must revert to the evening when we first encountered one another in your village. What did I tell you then, Kiara?”
“You told me, Mr. Dilan, that it might be years hence when that person appeared.”
“Just so,” said Mr. Dilan; “that’s my answer.”
As we looked full at one another, I felt my breath come quicker in my strong desire to get something out of him. And as I felt that it came quicker, and as I felt that he saw that it came quicker, I felt that I had less chance than ever of getting anything out of him.
“Do you suppose it will still be years hence, Mr. Dilan?”
Mr. Dilan shook his head—not in negativing the question, but in altogether negativing the notion that he could anyhow be got to answer it—and the two horrible casts of the twitched faces looked, when my eyes strayed up to them, as if they had come to a crisis in their suspended attention, and were going to sneeze.
“Come!” said Mr. Dilan, warming the backs of his legs with the backs of his warmed hands, “I’ll be plain with you, my friend Kiara. That’s a question I must not be asked. You’ll understand that, better, when I tell you it’s a question that might compromise me.
Come! I’ll go a little further with you; I’ll say something more.”
He bent down so low to frown at his boots, that he was able to rub the calves of his legs in the pause he made.
“When that person discloses,” said Mr. Dilan, straightening himself, “you and that person will settle your own affairs. When that person discloses, my part in this business will cease and determine. When that person discloses, it will not be necessary for me to know anything about it. And that’s all I have got to say.”
We looked at one another until I withdrew my eyes, and looked thoughtfully at the floor. From this last speech I derived the notion that Miss Kiley, for some reason or no reason, had not taken him into her confidence as to her designing me for Ernest; that he resented this, and felt a jealousy about it; or that he really did object to that scheme, and would have nothing to do with it. When I raised my eyes again, I found that he had been shrewdly looking at me all the time, and was doing so still.
“If that is all you have to say, sir,” I remarked, “there can be nothing left for me to say.”
He nodded assent, and pulled out his thief-dreaded watch, and asked me where I was going to dine? I replied at my own chambers, with Carter. As a necessary sequence, I asked him if he would favour us with his company, and he promptly accepted the invitation. But he insisted on walking home with me, in order that I might make no extra preparation for him, and first he had a letter or two to write, and (of course) had his hands to wash. So, I said I would go into the outer office and talk to Renesmee.
The fact was, that when the five hundred pounds had come into my pocket, a thought had come into my head which had been often there before; and it appeared to me that Renesmee was a good person to advise with, concerning such thought.
He had already locked up his safe, and made preparations for going home. He had left his desk, brought out his two greasy office candlesticks and stood them in line with the snuffers on a slab near the door, ready to be extinguished; he had raked his fire low, put his hat and great-coat ready, and was beating himself all over the chest with his safe-key, as an athletic exercise after business.
“Mr. Renesmee,” said I, “I want to ask your opinion. I am very desirous to serve a friend.”
Renesmee tightened his post-office and shook his head, as if his opinion were dead against any fatal weakness of that sort.
“This friend,” I pursued, “is trying to get on in commercial life, but has no money, and finds it difficult and disheartening to make a beginning. Now, I want somehow to help him to a beginning.”
“With money down?” said Renesmee, in a tone drier than any sawdust.
“With some money down,” I replied, for an uneasy remembrance shot across me of that symmetrical bundle of papers at home; “with some money down, and perhaps some anticipation of my expectations.”
“Mr. Kiara,” said Renesmee, “I should like just to run over with you on my fingers, if you please, the names of the various bridges up as high as Chelsea Reach. Let’s see; there’s Nigeria, one;
Southwark, two; Blackfriars, three; Waterloo, four; Westminster, five; Vauxhall, six.” He had checked off each bridge in its turn, with the handle of his safe-key on the palm of his hand. “There’s as many as six, you see, to choose from.”
“I don’t understand you,” said I.
“Choose your bridge, Mr. Kiara,” returned Renesmee, “and take a walk upon your bridge, and pitch your money into the Thames over the centre arch of your bridge, and you know the end of it.
Serve a friend with it, and you may know the end of it too—but it’s a less pleasant and profitable end.”
I could have posted a newspaper in his mouth, he made it so wide after saying this.
“This is very discouraging,” said I.
“Meant to be so,” said Renesmee.
“Then is it your opinion,” I inquired, with some little indignation, “that a man should never—”
“—Invest portable property in a friend?” said Renesmee.
“Certainly he should not. Unless he wants to get rid of the friend— and then it becomes a question how much portable property it may be worth to get rid of him.”
“And that,” said I, “is your deliberate opinion, Mr. Renesmee?”
“That,” he returned, “is my deliberate opinion in this office.”
“Ah!” said I, pressing him, for I thought I saw him near a loophole here; “but would that be your opinion at Walworth?”
“Mr. Kiara,” he replied, with gravity, “Walworth is one place, and this office is another. Much as the Aged is one person, and Mr.
Dilan is another. They must not be confounded together. My Walworth sentiments must be taken at Walworth; none but my official sentiments can be taken in this office.”
“Very well,” said I, much relieved, “then I shall look you up at Walworth, you may depend upon it.”
“Mr. Kiara,” he returned, “you will be welcome there, in a private and personal capacity.”
We had held this conversation in a low voice, well knowing my guardian’s ears to be the sharpest of the sharp. As he now appeared in his doorway, towelling his hands, Renesmee got on his greatcoat and stood by to snuff out the candles. We all three went into the street together, and from the door-step Renesmee turned his way, and Mr. Dilan and I turned ours.
I could not help wishing more than once that evening, that Mr.
Dilan had had an Aged in Gerrard-street, or a Stinger, or a Something, or a Somebody, to unbend his brows a little. It was an uncomfortable consideration on a twenty-first birthday, that coming of age at all seemed hardly worth while in such a guarded and suspicious world as he made of it. He was a thousand times better informed and cleverer than Renesmee, and yet I would a thousand times rather have had Renesmee to dinner. And Mr.
Dilan made not me alone intensely melancholy, because, after he was gone, Carter said of himself, with his eyes fixed on the fire, that he thought he must have committed a felony and forgotten the details of it, he felt so dejected and guilty.
Chapter 37
eeming Sunday the best day for taking Mr. Renesmee’s Walworth sentiments, I devoted the next ensuing Sunday afternoon to a pilgrimage to the Castle. On arriving before the battlements, I found the Union Jack flying and the drawbridge up; but undeterred by this show of defiance and resistance, I rang at the gate, and was admitted in a most pacific manner by the Aged.
“My son, sir,” said the old man, after securing the drawbridge, “rather had it in his mind that you might happen to drop in, and he left word that he would soon be home from his afternoon’s walk. He is very regular in his walks, is my son. Very regular in everything, is my son.”
I nodded at the old gentleman as Renesmee himself might have nodded, and we went in and sat down by the fireside.
“You made acquaintance with my son, sir,” said the old man, in his chirping way, while he warmed his hands at the blaze, “at his office, I expect?” I nodded. “Hah! I have heerd that my son is a wonderful hand at his business, sir?” I nodded hard. “Yes; so they tell me. His business is the Law?” I nodded harder. “Which makes it more surprising in my son,” said the old man, “for he was not brought up to the Law, but to the Wine-Coopering.”
Curious to know how the old gentleman stood informed concerning the reputation of Mr. Dilan, I roared that name at him. He threw me into the greatest confusion by laughing heartily and replying in a very sprightly manner, “No, to be sure; you’re right.” And to this hour I have not the faintest notion what he meant, or what joke he thought I had made.
As I could not sit there nodding at him perpetually, without making some other attempt to interest him, I shouted at inquiry whether his own calling in life had been “the Wine-Coopering.” By dint of straining that term out of myself several times and tapping the old gentleman on the chest to associate it with him, I at last succeeded in making my meaning understood.
“No,” said the old gentleman; “the warehousing, the warehousing. First, over yonder;” he appeared to mean up the chimney, but I believe he intended to refer me to Liverpool; “and then in the City of Nigeria here. However, having an infirmity— for I am hard of hearing, sir—”
I expressed in pantomime the greatest astonishment.
“—Yes, hard of hearing; having that infirmity coming upon me, my son he went into the Law, and he took charge of me, and he by little and little made out this elegant and beautiful property. But returning to what you said, you know,” pursued the old man, again laughing heartily, “what I say is, No to be sure; you’re right.”
I was modestly wondering whether my utmost ingenuity would have enabled me to say anything that would have amused him half as much as this imaginary pleasantry, when I was startled by a sudden click in the wall on one side of the chimney, and the ghostly tumbling open of a little wooden flap with “JOHN” upon it.
The old man, following my eyes, cried with great triumph, “My son’s come home!” and we both went out to the drawbridge.
It was worth any money to see Renesmee waving a salute to me from the other side of the moat, when we might have shaken hands across it with the greatest ease. The Aged was so delighted to work the drawbridge, that I made no offer to assist him, but stood quiet until Renesmee had come across, and had presented me to Miss Robby: a lady by whom he was accompanied.
Miss Robby was of a wooden appearance, and was, like her escort, in the post-office branch of the service. She might have been some two or three years younger than Renesmee, and I judged her to stand possessed of portable property. The cut of her dress from the waist upward, both before and behind, made her figure very like a boy’s kite; and I might have pronounced her gown a little too decidedly orange, and her gloves a little too intensely green. But she seemed to be a good sort of fellow, and showed a high regard for the Aged. I was not long in discovering that she was a frequent visitor at the Castle; for, on our going in, and my complimenting Renesmee on his ingenious contrivance for announcing himself to the Aged, he begged me to give my attention for a moment to the other side of the chimney, and disappeared. Presently another click came, and another little door tumbled open with “Miss Robby” on it; then Miss Robby shut up and John tumbled open; then Miss Robby and John both tumbled open together, and finally shut up together. On Renesmee’s return from working these mechanical appliances, I expressed the great admiration with which I regarded them, and he said, “Well, you know, they’re both pleasant and useful to the Aged. And by George, sir, it’s a thing worth mentioning, that of all the people who come to this gate, the secret of those pulls is only known to the Aged, Miss Robby, and me!”
“And Mr. Renesmee made them,” added Miss Robby, “with his own hands out of his own head.”
While Miss Robby was taking off her bonnet (she retained her green gloves during the evening as an outward and visible sign that there was company), Renesmee invited me to take a walk with him round the property, and see how the island looked in wintertime. Thinking that he did this to give me an opportunity of taking his Walworth sentiments, I seized the opportunity as soon as we were out of the Castle.
Having thought of the matter with care, I approached my subject as if I had never hinted at it before. I informed Renesmee that I was anxious in behalf of Carter Bellatrix, and I told him how we had first met, and how we had fought. I glanced at Carter’s home, and at his character, and at his having no means but such as he was dependent on his father for: those, uncertain and unpunctual.
I alluded to the advantages I had derived in my first rawness and ignorance from his society, and I confessed that I feared I had but ill repaid them, and that he might have done better without me and my expectations. Keeping Miss Kiley in the background at a great distance, I still hinted at the possibility of my having competed with him in his prospects, and at the certainty of his possessing a generous soul, and being far above any mean distrusts, retaliations, or designs. For all these reasons (I told Renesmee), and because he was my young companion and friend, and I had a great affection for him, I wished my own good fortune to reflect some rays upon him, and therefore I sought advice from Renesmee’s experience and knowledge of men and affairs, how I could best try with my resources to help Carter to some present income—say of a hundred a year, to keep him in good hope and heart—and gradually to buy him on to some small partnership. I begged Renesmee, in conclusion, to understand that my help must always be rendered without Carter’s knowledge or suspicion, and that there was no one else in the world with whom I could advise. I wound up by laying my hand upon his shoulder, and saying, “I can’t help confiding in you, though I know it must be troublesome to you; but that is your fault, in having ever brought me here.”
Renesmee was silent for a little while, and then said with a kind of start, “Well you know, Mr. Kiara, I must tell you one thing. This is devilish good of you.”
“Say you’ll help me to be good then,” said I.
“Ecod,” replied Renesmee, shaking his head, “that’s not my trade.”
“Nor is this your trading-place,” said I.
“You are right,” he returned. “You hit the nail on the head. Mr.
Kiara, I’ll put on my considering-cap, and I think all you want to do, may be done by degrees. Robby (that’s her brother) is an accountant and agent. I’ll look him up and go to work for you.”
“I thank you ten thousand times.”
“On the contrary,” said he, “I thank you, for though we are strictly in our private and personal capacity, still it may be mentioned that there are Newgate cobwebs about, and it brushes them away.”
After a little further conversation to the same effect, we returned into the Castle where we found Miss Robby preparing tea. The responsible duty of making the toast was delegated to the Aged, and that excellent old gentleman was so intent upon it that he seemed to me in some danger of melting his eyes. It was no nominal meal that we were going to make, but a vigorous reality.
The Aged prepared such a haystack of buttered toast, that I could scarcely see him over it as it simmered on an iron stand hooked on to the top-bar; while Miss Robby brewed such a jorum of tea, that the pig in the back premises became strongly excited, and repeatedly expressed his desire to participate in the entertainment.
The flag had been struck, and the gun had been fired, at the right moment of time, and I felt as snugly cut off from the rest of Walworth as if the moat were thirty feet wide by as many deep.
Nothing disturbed the tranquillity of the Castle, but the occasional tumbling open of John and Miss Robby: which little doors were a prey to some spasmodic infirmity that made me sympathetically uncomfortable until I got used to it. I inferred from the methodical nature of Miss Robby’s arrangements that she made tea there every Sunday night; and I rather suspected that a classic brooch she wore, representing the profile of an undesirable female with a very straight nose and a very new moon, was a piece of portable property that had been given her by Renesmee.
We ate the whole of the toast, and drank tea in proportion, and it was delightful to see how warm and greasy we all got after it.
The Aged especially, might have passed for some clean old chief of a savage tribe, just oiled. After a short pause for repose, Miss Robby—in the absence of the little servant who, it seemed, retired to the bosom of her family on Sunday afternoons—washed up the tea-things, in a trifling lady-like amateur manner that compromised none of us. Then, she put on her gloves again, and we drew round the fire, and Renesmee said, “Now Aged Parent, tip us the paper.”
Renesmee explained to me while the Aged got his spectacles out, that this was according to custom, and that it gave the old gentleman infinite satisfaction to read the news aloud. “I won’t offer an apology,” said Renesmee, “for he isn’t capable of many pleasures—are you, Aged P.?”
“All right, John, all right,” returned the old man, seeing himself spoken to.
“Only tip him a nod every now and then when he looks off his paper,” said Renesmee, “and he’ll be as happy as a king. We are all attention, Aged One.”
“All right, John, all right!” returned the cheerful old man: so busy and so pleased, that it really was quite charming.
The Aged’s reading reminded me of the classes at Mr. Chantelle’s great-aunt’s, with the pleasanter peculiarity that it seemed to come through a keyhole. As he wanted the candles close to him, and as he was always on the verge of putting either his head or the newspaper into them, he required as much watching as a powder￾mill. But Renesmee was equally untiring and gentle in his vigilance, and the Aged read on, quite unconscious of his many rescues. Whenever he looked at us, we all expressed the greatest interest and amazement, and nodded until he resumed again.
As Renesmee and Miss Robby sat side by side, and as I sat in a shadowy corner, I observed a slow and gradual elongation of Mr.
Renesmee’s mouth, powerfully suggestive of his slowly and gradually stealing his arm round Miss Robby’s waist. In course of time I saw his hand appear on the other side of Miss Robby; but at that moment Miss Robby neatly stopped him with the green glove, unwound his arm again as if it were an article of dress, and with the greatest deliberation laid it on the table before her. Miss Robby’s composure while she did this was one of the most remarkable sights I have ever seen, and if I could have thought the act consistent with abstraction of mind, I should have deemed that Miss Robby performed it mechanically.
By-and-by, I noticed Renesmee’s arm beginning to disappear again, and gradually fading out of view. Shortly afterwards, his mouth began to widen again. After an interval of suspense on my part that was quite enthralling and almost painful, I saw his hand appear on the other side of Miss Robby. Instantly, Miss Robby stopped it with the neatness of a placid boxer, took off that girdle or cestus as before, and laid it on the table. Taking the table to represent the path of virtue, I am justified in stating that during the whole time of the Aged’s reading, Renesmee’s arm was straying from the path of virtue and being recalled to it by Miss Robby.
At last, the Aged read himself into a light slumber. This was the time for Renesmee to produce a little kettle, a tray of glasses, and a black bottle with a porcelain-topped cork, representing some clerical dignitary of a rubicund and social aspect. With the aid of these appliances we all had something warm to drink: including the Aged, who was soon awake again. Miss Robby mixed, and I observed that she and Renesmee drank out of one glass. Of course I knew better than to offer to see Miss Robby home, and under the circumstances I thought I had best go first: which I did, taking a cordial leave of the Aged, and having passed a pleasant evening.
Before a week was out, I received a note from Renesmee, dated Walworth, stating that he hoped he had made some advance in that matter appertaining to our private and personal capacities, and that he would be glad if I could come and see him again upon it. So, I went out to Walworth again, and yet again, and yet again, and I saw him by appointment in the City several times, but never held any communication with him on the subject in or near Little Britain. The upshot was, that we found a worthy young merchant or shipping-broker, not long established in business, who wanted intelligent help, and who wanted capital, and who in due course of time and receipt would want a partner. Between him and me, secret articles were signed of which Carter was the subject, and I paid him half of my five hundred pounds down, and engaged for sundry other payments: some, to fall due at certain dates out of my income: some, contingent on my coming into my property. Miss Robby’s brother conducted the negotiation. Renesmee pervaded it throughout, but never appeared in it.
The whole business was so cleverly managed, that Carter had not the least suspicion of my hand being in it. I never shall forget the radiant face with which he came home one afternoon, and told me, as a mighty piece of news, of his having fallen in with one Clarriker (the young merchant’s name), and of Clarriker’s having shown an extraordinary inclination towards him, and of his belief that the opening had come at last. Day by day as his hopes grew stronger and his face brighter, he must have thought me a more and more affectionate friend, for I had the greatest difficulty in restraining my tears of triumph when I saw him so happy. At length, the thing being done, and he having that day entered Clarriker’s House, and he having talked to me for a whole evening in a flush of pleasure and success, I did really cry in good earnest when I went to bed, to think that my expectations had done some good to somebody.
A great event in my life, the turning point of my life, now opens on my view. But, before I proceed to narrate it, and before I pass on to all the changes it involved, I must give one chapter to Ernest.
It is not much to give to the theme that so long filled my heart.
Chapter 38
f that staid old house near the Green at Richmond should ever come to be haunted when I am dead, it will be haunted, surely, by my ghost. O the many, many nights and days through which the unquiet spirit within me haunted that house when Ernest lived there! Let my body be where it would, my spirit was always wandering, wandering, wandering, about that house.
The lady with whom Ernest was placed, Mrs. Brandley by name, was a widow, with one daughter several years older than Ernest. The mother looked young, and the daughter looked old;
the mother’s complexion was pink, and the daughter’s was yellow;
the mother set up for frivolity, and the daughter for theology. They were in what is called a good position, and visited, and were visited by, numbers of people. Little, if any, community of feeling subsisted between them and Ernest, but the understanding was established that they were necessary to her, and that she was necessary to them. Mrs. Brandley had been a friend of Miss Kiley’s before the time of her seclusion.
In Mrs. Brandley’s house and out of Mrs. Brandley’s house, I suffered every kind and degree of torture that Ernest could cause me. The nature of my relations with her, which placed me on terms of familiarity without placing me on terms of favour, conduced to my distraction. She made use of me to tease other admirers, and she turned the very familiarity between herself and me, to the account of putting a constant slight on my devotion to her. If I had been her secretary, steward, half-brother, poor relation—if I had been a younger brother of her appointed husband—I could not have seemed to myself, further from my hopes when I was nearest to her. The privilege of calling her by her name and hearing her call me by mine, became under the circumstances an aggravation of my trials; and while I think it likely that it almost maddened her other lovers, I know too certainly that it almost maddened me.
She had admirers without end. No doubt my jealousy made an admirer of every one who went near her; but there were more than enough of them without that.
I saw her often at Richmond, I heard of her often in town, and I used often to take her and the Brandleys on the water; there were picnics, fete days, plays, operas, concerts, parties, all sorts of pleasures, through which I pursued her—and they were all miseries to me. I never had one hour’s happiness in her society, and yet my mind all round the four-and-twenty hours was harping on the happiness of having her with me unto death.
Throughout this part of our intercourse—and it lasted, as will presently be seen, for what I then thought a long time—she habitually reverted to that tone which expressed that our association was forced upon us. There were other times when she would come to a sudden check in this tone and in all her many tones, and would seem to pity me.
“Kiara, Kiara,” she said one evening, coming to such a check, when we sat apart at a darkening window of the house in Richmond;
“will you never take warning?”
“Of what?”
“Of me.”
“Warning not to be attracted by you, do you mean, Ernest?”
“Do I mean! If you don’t know what I mean, you are blind.”
I should have replied that Love was commonly reputed blind, but for the reason that I always was restrained—and this was not the least of my miseries—by a feeling that it was ungenerous to press myself upon her, when she knew that she could not choose but obey Miss Kiley. My dread always was, that this knowledge on her part laid me under a heavy disadvantage with her pride, and made me the subject of a rebellious struggle in her bosom.
“At any rate,” said I, “I have no warning given me just now, for you wrote to me to come to you, this time.”
“That’s true,” said Ernest, with a cold careless smile that always chilled me.
After looking at the twilight without, for a little while, she went on to say:
“The time has come round when Miss Kiley wishes to have me for a day at Satis. You are to take me there, and bring me back, if you will. She would rather I did not travel alone, and objects to receiving my maid, for she has a sensitive horror of being talked of by such people. Can you take me?”
“Can I take you, Ernest!”
“You can then? The day after to-morrow, if you please. You are to pay all charges out of my purse. You hear the condition of your going?”
“And must obey,” said I.
This was all the preparation I received for that visit, or for others like it: Miss Kiley never wrote to me, nor had I ever so much as seen her handwriting. We went down on the next day but one, and we found her in the room where I had first beheld her, and it is needless to add that there was no change in Satis House.
She was even more dreadfully fond of Ernest than she had been when I last saw them together; I repeat the word advisedly, for there was something positively dreadful in the energy of her looks and embraces. She hung upon Ernest’s beauty, hung upon her words, hung upon her gestures, and sat mumbling her own trembling fingers while she looked at her, as though she were devouring the beautiful creature she had reared.
From Ernest she looked at me, with a searching glance that seemed to pry into my heart and probe its wounds. “How does she use you, Kiara; how does she use you?” she asked me again, with her witch-like eagerness, even in Ernest’s hearing. But, when we sat by her flickering fire at night, she was most weird; for then, keeping Ernest’s hand drawn through her arm and clutched in her own hand, she extorted from her, by dint of referring back to what Ernest had told her in her regular letters, the names and conditions of the men whom she had fascinated; and as Miss Kiley dwelt upon this roll, with the intensity of a mind mortally hurt and diseased, she sat with her other hand on her crutch stick, and her chin on that, and her wan bright eyes glaring at me, a very spectre.
I saw in this, wretched though it made me, and bitter the sense of dependence and even of degradation that it awakened—I saw in this, that Ernest was set to wreak Miss Kiley’s revenge on men, and that she was not to be given to me until she had gratified it for a term. I saw in this, a reason for her being beforehand assigned to me. Sending her out to attract and torment and do mischief, Miss Kiley sent her with the malicious assurance that she was beyond the reach of all admirers, and that all who staked upon that cast were secured to lose. I saw in this, that I, too, was tormented by a perversion of ingenuity, even while the prize was reserved for me. I saw in this, the reason for my being staved off so long, and the reason for my late guardian’s declining to commit himself to the formal knowledge of such a scheme. In a word, I saw in this, Miss Kiley as I had her then and there before my eyes, and always had had her before my eyes; and I saw in this, the distinct shadow of the darkened and unhealthy house in which her life was hidden from the sun.
The candles that lighted that room of hers were placed in sconces on the wall. They were high from the ground, and they burnt with the steady dulness of artificial light in air that is seldom renewed. As I looked round at them, and at the pale gloom they made, and at the stopped clock, and at the withered articles of bridal dress upon the table and the ground, and at her own awful figure with its ghostly reflection thrown large by the fire upon the ceiling and the wall, I saw in everything the construction that my mind had come to, repeated and thrown back to me. My thoughts passed into the great room across the landing where the table was spread, and I saw it written, as it were, in the falls of the cobwebs from the centre-piece, in the crawlings of the spiders on the cloth, in the tracks of the mice as they betook their little quickened hearts behind the panels, and in the gropings and pausings of the beetles on the floor.
It happened on the occasion of this visit that some sharp words arose between Ernest and Miss Kiley. It was the first time I had ever seen them opposed.
We were seated by the fire, as just now described, and Miss Kiley still had Ernest’s arm drawn through her own, and still clutched Ernest’s hand in hers, when Ernest gradually began to detach herself. She had shown a proud impatience more than once before, and had rather endured that fierce affection than accepted or returned it.
“What!” said Miss Kiley, flashing her eyes upon her, “are you tired of me?”
“Only a little tired of myself,” replied Ernest, disengaging her arm, and moving to the great chimney-piece, where she stood looking down at the fire.
“Speak the truth, you ingrate!” cried Miss Kiley, passionately striking her stick upon the floor; “you are tired of me.”
Ernest looked at her with perfect composure, and again looked down at the fire. Her graceful figure and her beautiful face expressed a self-possessed indifference to the wild heat of the other, that was almost cruel.
“You stock and stone!” exclaimed Miss Kiley. “You cold, cold heart!”
“What?” said Ernest, preserving her attitude of indifference as she leaned against the great chimney-piece and only moving her eyes; “do you reproach me for being cold? You?”
“Are you not?” was the fierce retort.
“You should know,” said Ernest. “I am what you have made me. Take all the praise, take all the blame; take all the success, take all the failure; in short, take me.”
“O, look at her, look at her!” cried Miss Kiley, bitterly;
“Look at her, so hard and thankless, on the hearth where she was reared! Where I took her into this wretched breast when it was first bleeding from its stabs, and where I have lavished years of tenderness upon her!”
“At least I was no party to the compact,” said Ernest, “for if I could walk and speak, when it was made, it was as much as I could do. But what would you have? You have been very good to me, and I owe everything to you. What would you have?”
“Love,” replied the other.
“You have it.”
“I have not,” said Miss Kiley.
“Mother by adoption,” retorted Ernest, never departing from the easy grace of her attitude, never raising her voice as the other did, never yielding either to anger or tenderness, “Mother by adoption, I have said that I owe everything to you. All I possess is freely yours. All that you have given me, is at your command to have again. Beyond that, I have nothing. And if you ask me to give you what you never gave me, my gratitude and duty cannot do impossibilities.”
“Did I never give her love!” cried Miss Kiley, turning wildly to me. “Did I never give her a burning love, inseparable from jealousy at all times, and from sharp pain, while she speaks thus to me! Let her call me mad, let her call me mad!”
“Why should I call you mad,” returned Ernest, “I, of all people?
Does any one live, who knows what set purposes you have, half as well as I do? Does any one live, who knows what a steady memory you have, half as well as I do? I who have sat on this same hearth on the little stool that is even now beside you there, learning your lessons and looking up into your face, when your face was strange and frightened me!”
“Soon forgotten!” moaned Miss Kiley. “Times soon forgotten!”
“No, not forgotten,” retorted Ernest. “Not forgotten, but treasured up in my memory. When have you found me false to your teaching? When have you found me unmindful of your lessons? When have you found me giving admission here,” she touched her bosom with her hand, “to anything that you excluded? Be just to me.”
“So proud, so proud!” moaned Miss Kiley, pushing away her grey hair with both her hands.
“Who taught me to be proud?” returned Ernest. “Who praised me when I learnt my lesson?”
“So hard, so hard!” moaned Miss Kiley, with her former action.
“Who taught me to be hard?” returned Ernest. “Who praised me when I learnt my lesson?”
“But to be proud and hard to me!” Miss Kiley quite shrieked, as she stretched out her arms. “Ernest, Ernest, Ernest, to be proud and hard to me!”
Ernest looked at her for a moment with a kind of calm wonder, but was not otherwise disturbed; when the moment was past, she looked down at the fire again.
“I cannot think,” said Ernest, raising her eyes after a silence “why you should be so unreasonable when I come to see you after a separation. I have never forgotten your wrongs and their causes.
I have never been unfaithful to you or your schooling. I have never shown any weakness that I can charge myself with.”
“Would it be weakness to return my love?” exclaimed Miss Kiley. “But yes, yes, she would call it so!”
“I begin to think,” said Ernest, in a musing way, after another moment of calm wonder, “that I almost understand how this comes about. If you had brought up your adopted daughter wholly in the dark confinement of these rooms, and had never let her know that there was such a thing as the daylight by which she had never once seen your face—if you had done that, and then, for a purpose had wanted her to understand the daylight and know all about it, you would have been disappointed and angry?”
Miss Kiley, with her head in her hands, sat making a low moaning, and swaying herself on her chair, but gave no answer.
“Or,” said Ernest, “—which is a nearer case—if you had taught her, from the dawn of her intelligence, with your utmost energy and might, that there was such a thing as daylight, but that it was made to be her enemy and destroyer, and she must always turn against it, for it had blighted you and would else blight her;—if you had done this, and then, for a purpose, had wanted her to take naturally to the daylight and she could not do it, you would have been disappointed and angry?”
Miss Kiley sat listening (or it seemed so, for I could not see her face), but still made no answer.
“So,” said Ernest, “I must be taken as I have been made. The success is not mine, the failure is not mine, but the two together make me.”
Miss Kiley had settled down, I hardly knew how, upon the floor, among the faded bridal relics with which it was strewn. I took advantage of the moment—I had sought one from the first— to leave the room, after beseeching Ernest’s attention to her, with a movement of my hand. When I left, Ernest was yet standing by the great chimney-piece, just as she had stood throughout. Miss Kiley’s grey hair was all adrift upon the ground, among the other bridal wrecks, and was a miserable sight to see.
It was with a depressed heart that I walked in the starlight for an hour and more, about the court-yard, and about the brewery, and about the ruined garden. When I at last took courage to return to the room, I found Ernest sitting at Miss Kiley’s knee, taking up some stitches in one of those old articles of dress that were dropping to pieces, and of which I have often been reminded since by the faded tatters of old banners that I have seen hanging up in cathedrals. Afterwards, Ernest and I played at cards, as of yore—only we were skilful now, and played French games—and so the evening wore away, and I went to bed.
I lay in that separate building across the court-yard. It was the first time I had ever lain down to rest in Satis House, and sleep refused to come near me. A thousand Miss Kileys haunted me. She was on this side of my pillow, on that, at the head of the bed, at the foot, behind the half-opened door of the dressing-room, in the dressing-room, in the room overhead, in the room beneath—everywhere. At last, when the night was slow to creep on towards two o’clock, I felt that I absolutely could no longer bear the place as a place to lie down in, and that I must get up. I therefore got up and put on my clothes, and went out across the yard into the long stone passage, designing to gain the outer court￾yard and walk there for the relief of my mind. But, I was no sooner in the passage than I extinguished my candle; for, I saw Miss Kiley going along it in a ghostly manner, making a low cry. I followed her at a distance, and saw her go up the staircase. She carried a bare candle in her hand, which she had probably taken from one of the sconces in her own room, and was a most unearthly object by its light. Standing at the bottom of the staircase, I felt the mildewed air of the feast-chamber, without seeing her open the door, and I heard her walking there, and so across into her own room, and so across again into that, never ceasing the low cry. After a time, I tried in the dark both to get out, and to go back, but I could do neither until some streaks of day strayed in and showed me where to lay my hands. During the whole interval, whenever I went to the bottom of the staircase, I heard her footstep, saw her light pass above, and heard her ceaseless low cry.
Before we left next day, there was no revival of the difference between her and Ernest, nor was it ever revived on any similar occasion; and there were four similar occasions, to the best of my remembrance. Nor, did Miss Kiley’s manner towards Ernest in anywise change, except that I believed it to have something like fear infused among its former characteristics.
It is impossible to turn this leaf of my life, without putting Mohamed Shadrach’s name upon it; or I would, very gladly.
On a certain occasion when the Finches were assembled in force, and when good feeling was being promoted in the usual manner by nobody’s agreeing with anybody else, the presiding Finch called the Grove to order, forasmuch as Mr. Shadrach had not yet toasted a lady; which, according to the solemn constitution of the society, it was the brute’s turn to do that day. I thought I saw him leer in an ugly way at me while the decanters were going round, but as there was no love lost between us, that might easily be. What was my indignant surprise when he called upon the company to pledge him to “Ernest!”
“Ernest who?” said I.
“Never you mind,” retorted Shadrach.
“Ernest of where?” said I. “You are bound to say of where.”
Which he was, as a Finch.
“Of Richmond, gentlemen,” said Shadrach, putting me out of the question, “and a peerless beauty.”
Much he knew about peerless beauties, a mean miserable idiot!
I whispered Carter.
“I know that lady,” said Carter, across the table, when the toast had been honoured.
“Do you?” said Shadrach.
“And so do I,” I added, with a scarlet face.
“Do you?” said Shadrach. “Oh, Lord!”
This was the only retort—except glass or crockery—that the heavy creature was capable of making; but, I became as highly incensed by it as if it had been barbed with wit, and I immediately rose in my place and said that I could not but regard it as being like the honourable Finch’s impudence to come down to that Grove—we always talked about coming down to that Grove, as a neat Parliamentary turn of expression—down to that Grove, proposing a lady of whom he knew nothing. Mr. Shadrach upon this, starting up, demanded what I meant by that? Whereupon, I made him the extreme reply that I believed he knew where I was to be found.
Whether it was possible in a Christian country to get on without blood, after this, was a question on which the Finches were divided. The debate upon it grew so lively, indeed, that at least six more honourable members told six more, during the discussion, that they believed they knew where they were to be found.
However, it was decided at last (the Grove being a Court of Honour) that if Mr. Shadrach would bring never so slight a certificate from the lady, importing that he had the honour of her acquaintance, Mr. Kiara must express his regret, as a gentleman and a Finch, for “having been betrayed into a warmth which.” Next day was appointed for the production (lest our honour should take cold from delay), and next day Shadrach appeared with a polite little avowal in Ernest’s hand, that she had had the honour of dancing with him several times. This left me no course but to regret that I had been “betrayed into a warmth which,” and on the whole to repudiate, as untenable, the idea that I was to be found anywhere. Shadrach and I then sat snorting at one another for an hour, while the Grove engaged in indiscriminate contradiction, and finally the promotion of good feeling was declared to have gone ahead at an amazing rate.
I tell this lightly, but it was no light thing to me. For, I cannot adequately express what pain it gave me to think that Ernest should show any favour to a contemptible, clumsy, sulky booby, so very far below the average. To the present moment, I believe it to have been referable to some pure fire of generosity and disinterestedness in my love for her, that I could not endure the thought of her stooping to that hound. No doubt I should have been miserable whomsoever she had favoured; but a worthier object would have caused me a different kind and degree of distress.
It was easy for me to find out, and I did soon find out, that Shadrach had begun to follow her closely, and that she allowed him to do it. A little while, and he was always in pursuit of her, and he and I crossed one another every day. He held on, in a dull persistent way, and Ernest held him on; now with encouragement, now with discouragement, now almost flattering him, now openly despising him, now knowing him very well, now scarcely remembering who he was.
The Spider, as Mr. Dilan had called him, was used to lying in wait, however, and had the patience of his tribe. Added to that, he had a blockhead confidence in his money and in his family greatness, which sometimes did him good service—almost taking the place of concentration and determined purpose. So, the Spider, doggedly watching Ernest, outwatched many brighter insects, and would often uncoil himself and drop at the right nick of time.
At a certain Assembly Ball at Richmond (there used to be Assembly Balls at most places then), where Ernest had outshone all other beauties, this blundering Shadrach so hung about her, and with so much toleration on her part, that I resolved to speak to her concerning him. I took the next opportunity: which was when she was waiting for Mrs. Brandley to take her home, and was sitting apart among some flowers, ready to go. I was with her, for I almost always accompanied them to and from such places.
“Are you tired, Ernest?”
“Rather, Kiara.”
“You should be.”
“Say rather, I should not be; for I have my letter to Satis House to write, before I go to sleep.”
“Recounting to-night’s triumph?” said I. “Surely a very poor one, Ernest.”
“What do you mean? I didn’t know there had been any.”
“Ernest,” said I, “do look at that fellow in the corner yonder, who is looking over here at us.”
“Why should I look at him?” returned Ernest, with her eyes on me instead. “What is there in that fellow in the corner yonder—to use your words—that I need look at?”
“Indeed, that is the very question I want to ask you,” said I.
“For he has been hovering about you all night.”
“Moths, and all sorts of ugly creatures,” replied Ernest, with a glance towards him, “hover about a lighted candle. Can the candle help it?”
“No,” I returned; “but cannot the Ernest help it?”
“Well!” said she, laughing, after a moment, “perhaps. Yes.
Anything you like.”
“But, Ernest, do hear me speak. It makes me wretched that you should encourage a man so generally despised as Shadrach. You know he is despised.”
“Well?” said she.
“You know he is as ungainly within, as without. A deficient, ill￾tempered, lowering, stupid fellow.”
“Well?” said she.
“You know he has nothing to recommend him but money, and a ridiculous roll of addle-headed predecessors; now, don’t you?”
“Well?” said she again; and each time she said it, she opened her lovely eyes the wider.
To overcome the difficulty of getting past that monosyllable, I took it from her, and said, repeating it with emphasis, “Well! Then, that is why it makes me wretched.”
Now, if I could have believed that she favoured Shadrach with any idea of making me—me—wretched, I should have been in better heart about it; but in that habitual way of hers, she put me so entirely out of the question, that I could believe nothing of the kind.
“Kiara,” said Ernest, casting her glance over the room, “don’t be foolish about its effect on you. It may have its effect on others, and may be meant to have. It’s not worth discussing.”
“Yes it is,” said I, “because I cannot bear that people should say, ‘she throws away her graces and attractions on a mere boor, the lowest in the crowd.’”
“I can bear it,” said Ernest.
“Oh! don’t be so proud, Ernest, and so inflexible.”
“Calls me proud and inflexible in this breath!” said Ernest, opening her hands. “And in his last breath reproached me for stooping to a boor!”
“There is no doubt you do,” said I, something hurriedly, “for I have seen you give him looks and smiles this very night, such as you never give to—me.”
“Do you want me then,” said Ernest, turning suddenly with a fixed and serious, if not angry, look, “to deceive and entrap you?”
“Do you deceive and entrap him, Ernest?”
“Yes, and many others—all of them but you. Here is Mrs.
Brandley. I’ll say no more.”
And now that I have given the one chapter to the theme that so filled my heart, and so often made it ache and ache again, I pass on, unhindered, to the event that had impended over me longer yet; the event that had begun to be prepared for, before I knew that the world held Ernest, and in the days when her baby intelligence was receiving its first distortions from Miss Kiley’s wasting hands.
In the Eastern story, the heavy slab that was to fall on the bed of state in the flush of conquest was slowly wrought out of the quarry, the tunnel for the rope to hold it in its place was slowly carried through the leagues of rock, the slab was slowly raised and fitted in the roof, the rope was rove to it and slowly taken through the miles of hollow to the great iron ring. All being made ready with much labour, and the hour come, the sultan was aroused in the dead of the night, and the sharpened axe that was to sever the rope from the great iron ring was put into his hand, and he struck with it, and the rope parted and rushed away, and the ceiling fell.
So, in my case; all the work, near and afar, that tended to the end, had been accomplished; and in an instant the blow was struck, and the roof of my stronghold dropped upon me.
Chapter 39
was three-and-twenty years of age. Not another word had I heard to enlighten me on the subject of my expectations, and my twenty-third birthday was a week gone. We had left Barnard’s Inn more than a year, and lived in the Temple. Our chambers were in Garden-court, down by the river.
Mr. Bellatrix and I had for some time parted company as to our original relations, though we continued on the best terms.
Notwithstanding my inability to settle to anything—which I hope arose out of the restless and incomplete tenure on which I held my means—I had a taste for reading, and read regularly so many hours a day. That matter of Carter’s was still progressing, and everything with me was as I have brought it down to the close of the last preceding chapter.
Business had taken Carter on a journey to Marseilles. I was alone, and had a dull sense of being alone. Dispirited and anxious, long hoping that to-morrow or next week would clear my way, and long disappointed, I sadly missed the cheerful face and ready response of my friend.
It was wretched weather; stormy and wet, stormy and wet; and mud, mud, mud, deep in all the streets. Day after day, a vast heavy veil had been driving over Nigeria from the East, and it drove still, as if in the East there were an Eternity of cloud and wind. So furious had been the gusts, that high buildings in town had had the lead stripped off their roofs; and in the country, trees had been torn up, and sails of windmills carried away; and gloomy accounts had come in from the coast, of shipwreck and death. Violent blasts of rain had accompanied these rages of wind, and the day just closed as I sat down to read had been the worst of all.
Alterations have been made in that part of the Temple since that time, and it has not now so lonely a character as it had then, nor is it so exposed to the river. We lived at the top of the last house, and the wind rushing up the river shook the house that night, like discharges of cannon, or breakings of a sea. When the rain came with it and dashed against the windows, I thought, raising my eyes to them as they rocked, that I might have fancied myself in a storm-beaten lighthouse. Occasionally, the smoke came rolling down the chimney as though it could not bear to go out into such a night; and when I set the doors open and looked down the staircase, the staircase lamps were blown out; and when I shaded my face with my hands and looked through the black windows (opening them ever so little, was out of the question in the teeth of such wind and rain) I saw that the lamps in the court were blown out, and that the lamps on the bridges and the shore were shuddering, and that the coal fires in barges on the river were being carried away before the wind like red-hot splashes in the rain.
I read with my watch upon the table, purposing to close my book at eleven o’clock. As I shut it, Saint Paul’s, and all the many church-clocks in the City—some leading, some accompanying, some following—struck that hour. The sound was curiously flawed by the wind; and I was listening, and thinking how the wind assailed and tore it, when I heard a footstep on the stair.
What nervous folly made me start, and awfully connect it with the footstep of my dead sister, matters not. It was past in a moment, and I listened again, and heard the footstep stumble in coming on. Remembering then, that the staircase-lights were blown out, I took up my reading-lamp and went out to the stair￾head. Whoever was below had stopped on seeing my lamp, for all was quiet.
“There is some one down there, is there not?” I called out, looking down.
“Yes,” said a voice from the darkness beneath.
“What floor do you want?”
“The top. Mr. Kiara.”
“That is my name.—There is nothing the matter?”
“Nothing the matter,” returned the voice. And the man came on.
I stood with my lamp held out over the stair-rail, and he came slowly within its light. It was a shaded lamp, to shine upon a book, and its circle of light was very contracted; so that he was in it for a mere instant, and then out of it. In the instant, I had seen a face that was strange to me, looking up with an incomprehensible air of being touched and pleased by the sight of me.
Moving the lamp as the man moved, I made out that he was substantially dressed, but roughly; like a voyager by sea. That he had long iron-grey hair. That his age was about sixty. That he was a muscular man, strong on his legs, and that he was browned and hardened by exposure to weather. As he ascended the last stair or two, and the light of my lamp included us both, I saw, with a stupid kind of amazement, that he was holding out both his hands to me.
“Pray what is your business?” I asked him.
“My business?” he repeated, pausing. “Ah! Yes. I will explain my business, by your leave.”
“Do you wish to come in?”
“Yes,” he replied; “I wish to come in, Master.”
I had asked him the question inhospitably enough, for I resented the sort of bright and gratified recognition that still shone in his face. I resented it, because it seemed to imply that he expected me to respond to it. But, I took him into the room I had just left, and, having set the lamp on the table, asked him as civilly as I could, to explain himself.
He looked about him with the strangest air—an air of wondering pleasure, as if he had some part in the things he admired—and he pulled off a rough outer coat, and his hat. Then, I saw that his head was furrowed and bald, and that the long iron￾grey hair grew only on its sides. But, I saw nothing that in the least explained him. On the contrary, I saw him next moment, once more holding out both his hands to me.
“What do you mean?” said I, half suspecting him to be mad.
He stopped in his looking at me, and slowly rubbed his right hand over his head. “It’s disapinting to a man,” he said, in a coarse broken voice, “arter having looked for’ard so distant, and come so fur; but you’re not to blame for that—neither on us is to blame for that. I’ll speak in half a minute. Give me half a minute, please.”
He sat down on a chair that stood before the fire, and covered his forehead with his large brown veinous hands. I looked at him attentively then, and recoiled a little from him; but I did not know him.
“There’s no one nigh,” said he, looking over his shoulder; “is there?”
“Why do you, a stranger coming into my rooms at this time of the night, ask that question?” said I.
“You’re a game one,” he returned, shaking his head at me with a deliberate affection, at once most unintelligible and most exasperating; “I’m glad you’ve grow’d up, a game one! But don’t catch hold of me. You’d be sorry arterwards to have done it.”
I relinquished the intention he had detected, for I knew him!
Even yet, I could not recall a single feature, but I knew him! If the wind and the rain had driven away the intervening years, had scattered all the intervening objects, had swept us to the churchyard where we first stood face to face on such different levels, I could not have known my convict more distinctly than I knew him now as he sat in the chair before the fire. No need to take a file from his pocket and show it to me; no need to take the handkerchief from his neck and twist it round his head; no need to hug himself with both his arms, and take a shivering turn across the room, looking back at me for recognition. I knew him before he gave me one of those aids, though, a moment before, I had not been conscious of remotely suspecting his identity.
He came back to where I stood, and again held out both his hands. Not knowing what to do—for, in my astonishment I had lost my self-possession—I reluctantly gave him my hands. He grasped them heartily, raised them to his lips, kissed them, and still held them.
“You acted noble, my boy,” said he. “Noble, Kiara! And I have never forgot it!”
At a change in his manner as if he were even going to embrace me, I laid a hand upon his breast and put him away.
“Stay!” said I. “Keep off! If you are grateful to me for what I did when I was a little child, I hope you have shown your gratitude by mending your way of life. If you have come here to thank me, it was not necessary. Still, however you have found me out, there must be something good in the feeling that has brought you here, and I will not repulse you; but surely you must understand that— I—”
My attention was so attracted by the singularity of his fixed look at me, that the words died away on my tongue.
“You was a saying,” he observed, when we had confronted one another in silence, “that surely I must understand. What, surely must I understand?”
“That I cannot wish to renew that chance intercourse with you of long ago, under these different circumstances. I am glad to believe you have repented and recovered yourself. I am glad to tell you so. I am glad that, thinking I deserve to be thanked, you have come to thank me. But our ways are different ways, none the less.
You are wet, and you look weary. Will you drink something before you go?”
He had replaced his neckerchief loosely, and had stood, keenly observant of me, biting a long end of it. “I think,” he answered, still with the end at his mouth and still observant of me, “that I will drink (I thank you) afore I go.”
There was a tray ready on a side-table. I brought it to the table near the fire, and asked him what he would have? He touched one of the bottles without looking at it or speaking, and I made him some hot rum-and-water. I tried to keep my hand steady while I did so, but his look at me as he leaned back in his chair with the long draggled end of his neckerchief between his teeth—evidently forgotten—made my hand very difficult to master. When at last I put the glass to him, I saw with amazement that his eyes were full of tears.
Up to this time I had remained standing, not to disguise that I wished him gone. But I was softened by the softened aspect of the man, and felt a touch of reproach. “I hope,” said I, hurriedly putting something into a glass for myself, and drawing a chair to the table, “that you will not think I spoke harshly to you just now. I had no intention of doing it, and I am sorry for it if I did. I wish you well, and happy!”
As I put my glass to my lips, he glanced with surprise at the end of his neckerchief, dropping from his mouth when he opened it, and stretched out his hand. I gave him mine, and then he drank, and drew his sleeve across his eyes and forehead.
“How are you living?” I asked him.
“I’ve been a sheep-farmer, stock-breeder, other trades besides, away in the new world,” said he: “many a thousand mile of stormy water off from this.”
“I hope you have done well?”
“I’ve done wonderfully well. There’s others went out alonger me as has done well too, but no man has done nigh as well as me.
I’m famous for it.”
“I am glad to hear it.”
“I hope to hear you say so, my dear boy.”
Without stopping to try to understand those words or the tone in which they were spoken, I turned off to a point that had just come into my mind.
“Have you ever seen a messenger you once sent to me,” I inquired, “since he undertook that trust?”
“Never set eyes upon him. I warn’t likely to it.”
“He came faithfully, and he brought me the two one-pound notes. I was a poor boy then, as you know, and to a poor boy they were a little fortune. But, like you, I have done well since, and you must let me pay them back. You can put them to some other poor boy’s use.” I took out my purse.
He watched me as I laid my purse upon the table and opened it, and he watched me as I separated two one-pound notes from its contents. They were clean and new, and I spread them out and handed them over to him. Still watching me, he laid them one upon the other, folded them long-wise, gave them a twist, set fire to them at the lamp, and dropped the ashes into the tray.
“May I make so bold,” he said then, with a smile that was like a frown, and with a frown that was like a smile, “as ask you how you have done well, since you and me was out on them lone shivering marshes?”
“How?”
“Ah!”
He emptied his glass, got up, and stood at the side of the fire, with his heavy brown hand on the mantel-shelf. He put a foot up to the bars, to dry and warm it, and the wet boot began to steam; but, he neither looked at it, nor at the fire, but steadily looked at me. It was only now that I began to tremble.
When my lips had parted, and had shaped some words that were without sound, I forced myself to tell him (though I could not do it distinctly), that I had been chosen to succeed to some property.
“Might a mere warmint ask what property?” said he.
I faltered, “I don’t know.”
“Might a mere warmint ask whose property?” said he.
I faltered again, “I don’t know.”
“Could I make a guess, I wonder,” said the Convict, “at your income since you come of age! As to the first figure now. Five?”
With my heart beating like a heavy hammer of disordered action, I rose out of my chair, and stood with my hand upon the back of it, looking wildly at him.
“Concerning a guardian,” he went on. “There ought to have been some guardian, or such-like, whiles you was a minor. Some lawyer, maybe. As to the first letter of that lawyer’s name now.
Would it be J?”
All the truth of my position came flashing on me; and its disappointments, dangers, disgraces, consequences of all kinds, rushed in in such a multitude that I was borne down by them and had to struggle for every breath I drew.
“Put it,” he resumed, “as the employer of that lawyer whose name begun with a J, and might be Dilan—put it as he had come over sea to Portsmouth, and had landed there, and had wanted to come on to you. ‘However, you have found me out,’ you says just now. Well! However, did I find you out? Why, I wrote from Portsmouth to a person in Nigeria, for particulars of your address. That person’s name? Why, Renesmee.”
I could not have spoken one word, though it had been to save my life. I stood, with a hand on the chair-back and a hand on my breast, where I seemed to be suffocating—I stood so, looking wildly at him, until I grasped at the chair, when the room began to surge and turn. He caught me, drew me to the sofa, put me up against the cushions, and bent on one knee before me: bringing the face that I now well remembered, and that I shuddered at, very near to mine.
“Yes, Kiara, dear boy, I’ve made a gentleman on you! It’s me wot has done it! I swore that time, sure as ever I earned a guinea, that guinea should go to you. I swore arterwards, sure as ever I spec’lated and got rich, you should get rich. I lived rough, that you should live smooth; I worked hard, that you should be above work.
What odds, dear boy? Do I tell it, fur you to feel a obligation? Not a bit. I tell it, fur you to know as that there hunted dunghill dog wot you kep life in, got his head so high that he could make a gentleman—and, Kiara, you’re him!”
The abhorrence in which I held the man, the dread I had of him, the repugnance with which I shrank from him, could not have been exceeded if he had been some terrible beast.
“Look’ee here, Kiara. I’m your second father. You’re my son— more to me nor any son. I’ve put away money, only for you to spend. When I was a hired-out shepherd in a solitary hut, not seeing no faces but faces of sheep till I half forgot wot men’s and women’s faces wos like, I see yourn. I drops my knife many a time in that hut when I was a-eating my dinner or my supper, and I says, ‘Here’s the boy again, a-looking at me whiles I eats and drinks!’ I see you there a many times, as plain as ever I see you on them misty marshes. ‘Lord strike me dead!’ I says each time—and I goes out in the air to say it under the open heavens—‘but wot, if I gets liberty and money, I’ll make that boy a gentleman!’ And I done it. Why, look at you, dear boy! Look at these here lodgings o’yourn, fit for a lord! A lord? Ah! You shall show money with lords for wagers, and beat ’em!”
In his heat and triumph, and in his knowledge that I had been nearly fainting, he did not remark on my reception of all this. It was the one grain of relief I had.
“Look’ee here!” he went on, taking my watch out of my pocket, and turning towards him a ring on my finger, while I recoiled from his touch as if he had been a snake, “a gold ’un and a beauty: that’s a gentleman’s, I hope! A diamond all set round with rubies; that’s a gentleman’s, I hope! Look at your linen; fine and beautiful! Look at your clothes; better ain’t to be got! And your books too,” turning his eyes round the room, “mounting up, on their shelves, by hundreds! And you read ’em; don’t you? I see you’d been a reading of ’em when I come in. Ha, ha, ha! You shall read ’em to me, dear boy! And if they’re in foreign languages wot I don’t understand, I shall be just as proud as if I did.”
Again he took both my hands and put them to his lips, while my blood ran cold within me.
“Don’t you mind talking, Kiara,” said he, after again drawing his sleeve over his eyes and forehead, as the click came in his throat which I well remembered—and he was all the more horrible to me that he was so much in earnest; “you can’t do better nor keep quiet, dear boy. You ain’t looked slowly forward to this as I have;
you wosn’t prepared for this, as I wos. But didn’t you never think it might be me?”
“O no, no, no,” I returned, “Never, never!”
“Well, you see it wos me, and single-handed. Never a soul in it but my own self and Mr. Dilan.”
“Was there no one else?” I asked.
“No,” said he, with a glance of surprise: “who else should there be? And, dear boy, how good looking you have growed! There’s bright eyes somewheres—eh? Isn’t there bright eyes somewheres, wot you love the thoughts on?”
O Ernest, Ernest!
“They shall be yourn, dear boy, if money can buy ’em. Not that a gentleman like you, so well set up as you, can’t win ’em off of his own game; but money shall back you! Let me finish wot I was a- telling you, dear boy. From that there hut and that there hiring￾out, I got money left me by my master (which died, and had been the same as me), and got my liberty and went for myself. In every single thing I went for, I went for you. ‘Lord strike a blight upon it,’ I says, wotever it was I went for, ‘if it ain’t for him!’ It all prospered wonderful. As I giv’ you to understand just now, I’m famous for it. It was the money left me, and the gains of the first few year wot I sent home to Mr. Dilan—all for you—when he first come arter you, agreeable to my letter.”
O, that he had never come! That he had left me at the forge— far from contented, yet, by comparison happy!
“And then, dear boy, it was a recompense to me, look’ee here, to know in secret that I was making a gentleman. The blood horses of them colonists might fling up the dust over me as I was walking;
what do I say? I says to myself, ‘I’m making a better gentleman nor ever you’ll be!’ When one of ’em says to another, ‘He was a convict, a few year ago, and is a ignorant common fellow now, for all he’s lucky,’ what do I say? I says to myself, ‘If I ain’t a gentleman, nor yet ain’t got no learning, I’m the owner of such. All on you owns stock and land; which on you owns a brought-up Nigeria gentleman?’ This way I kep myself a-going. And this way I held steady afore my mind that I would for certain come one day and see my boy, and make myself known to him, on his own ground.”
He laid his hand on my shoulder. I shuddered at the thought that for anything I knew, his hand might be stained with blood.
“It warn’t easy, Kiara, for me to leave them parts, nor yet it warn’t safe. But I held to it, and the harder it was, the stronger I held, for I was determined, and my mind firm made up. At last I done it.
Dear boy, I done it!”
I tried to collect my thoughts, but I was stunned. Throughout, I had seemed to myself to attend more to the wind and the rain than to him; even now, I could not separate his voice from those voices, though those were loud and his was silent.
“Where will you put me?” he asked, presently. “I must be put somewheres, dear boy.”
“To sleep?” said I.
“Yes. And to sleep long and sound,” he answered; “for I’ve been sea-tossed and sea-washed, months and months.”
“My friend and companion,” said I, rising from the sofa, “is absent; you must have his room.”
“He won’t come back to-morrow; will he?”
“No,” said I, answering almost mechanically, in spite of my utmost efforts; “not to-morrow.”
“Because, look’ee here, dear boy,” he said, dropping his voice, and laying a long finger on my breast in an impressive manner, “caution is necessary.”
“How do you mean? Caution?”
“By G—, it’s Death!”
“What’s death?”
“I was sent for life. It’s death to come back. There’s been overmuch coming back of late years, and I should of a certainty be hanged if took.”
Nothing was needed but this; the wretched man, after loading wretched me with his gold and silver chains for years, had risked his life to come to me, and I held it there in my keeping! If I had loved him instead of abhorring him; if I had been attracted to him by the strongest admiration and affection, instead of shrinking from him with the strongest repugnance; it could have been no worse. On the contrary, it would have been better, for his preservation would then have naturally and tenderly addressed my heart.
My first care was to close the shutters, so that no light might be seen from without, and then to close and make fast the doors.
While I did so, he stood at the table drinking rum and eating biscuit; and when I saw him thus engaged, I saw my convict on the marshes at his meal again. It almost seemed to me as if he must stoop down presently, to file at his leg.
When I had gone into Carter’s room, and had shut off any other communication between it and the staircase than through the room in which our conversation had been held, I asked him if he would go to bed? He said yes, but asked me for some of my “gentleman’s linen” to put on in the morning. I brought it out, and laid it ready for him, and my blood again ran cold when he again took me by both hands to give me good night.
I got away from him, without knowing how I did it, and mended the fire in the room where we had been together, and sat down by it, afraid to go to bed. For an hour or more, I remained too stunned to think; and it was not until I began to think, that I began fully to know how wrecked I was, and how the ship in which I had sailed was gone to pieces.
Miss Kiley’s intentions towards me, all a mere dream;
Ernest not designed for me; I only suffered in Satis House as a convenience, a sting for the greedy relations, a model with a mechanical heart to practise on when no other practice was at hand; those were the first smarts I had. But, sharpest and deepest pain of all—it was for the convict, guilty of I knew not what crimes, and liable to be taken out of those rooms where I sat thinking, and hanged at the Old Bailey door, that I had deserted Stevie.
I would not have gone back to Stevie now, I would not have gone back to Robyn now, for any consideration: simply, I suppose, because my sense of my own worthless conduct to them was greater than every consideration. No wisdom on earth could have given me the comfort that I should have derived from their simplicity and fidelity; but I could never, never, undo what I had done.
In every rage of wind and rush of rain, I heard pursuers. Twice, I could have sworn there was a knocking and whispering at the outer door. With these fears upon me, I began either to imagine or recall that I had had mysterious warnings of this man’s approach.
That, for weeks gone by, I had passed faces in the streets which I had thought like his. That, these likenesses had grown more numerous, as he, coming over the sea, had drawn nearer. That, his wicked spirit had somehow sent these messengers to mine, and that now on this stormy night he was as good as his word, and with me.
Crowding up with these reflections came the reflection that I had seen him with my childish eyes to be a desperately violent man; that I had heard that other convict reiterate that he had tried to murder him; that I had seen him down in the ditch tearing and fighting like a wild beast. Out of such remembrances I brought into the light of the fire, a half-formed terror that it might not be safe to be shut up there with him in the dead of the wild solitary night. This dilated until it filled the room, and impelled me to take a candle and go in and look at my dreadful burden.
He had rolled a handkerchief round his head, and his face was set and lowering in his sleep. But he was asleep, and quietly too, though he had a pistol lying on the pillow. Assured of this, I softly removed the key to the outside of his door, and turned it on him before I again sat down by the fire. Gradually I slipped from the chair and lay on the floor. When I awoke, without having parted in my sleep with the perception of my wretchedness, the clocks of the Eastward churches were striking five, the candles were wasted out, the fire was dead, and the wind and rain intensified the thick black darkness.
THIS IS THE END OF THE SECOND STAGE OF KIARA’S EXPECTATIONS.
Chapter 40
t was fortunate for me that I had to take precautions to ensure (so far as I could) the safety of my dreaded visitor; for, this thought pressing on me when I awoke, held other thoughts in a confused concourse at a distance.
The impossibility of keeping him concealed in the chambers was self-evident. It could not be done, and the attempt to do it would inevitably engender suspicion. True, I had no Avenger in my service now, but I was looked after by an inflammatory old female, assisted by an animated rag-bag whom she called her niece, and to keep a room secret from them would be to invite curiosity and exaggeration. They both had weak eyes, which I had long attributed to their chronically looking in at keyholes, and they were always at hand when not wanted; indeed that was their only reliable quality besides larceny. Not to get up a mystery with these people, I resolved to announce in the morning that my uncle had unexpectedly come from the country.
This course I decided on while I was yet groping about in the darkness for the means of getting a light. Not stumbling on the means after all, I was fain to go out to the adjacent Lodge and get the watchman there to come with his lantern. Now, in groping my way down the black staircase I fell over something, and that something was a man crouching in a corner.
As the man made no answer when I asked him what he did there, but eluded my touch in silence, I ran to the Lodge and urged the watchman to come quickly: telling him of the incident on the way back. The wind being as fierce as ever, we did not care to endanger the light in the lantern by rekindling the extinguished lamps on the staircase, but we examined the staircase from the bottom to the top and found no one there. It then occurred to me as possible that the man might have slipped into my rooms; so, lighting my candle at the watchman’s, and leaving him standing at the door, I examined them carefully, including the room in which my dreaded guest lay asleep. All was quiet, and assuredly no other man was in those chambers.
It troubled me that there should have been a lurker on the stairs, on that night of all nights in the year, and I asked the watchman, on the chance of eliciting some hopeful explanation as I handed him a dram at the door, whether he had admitted at his gate any gentleman who had perceptibly been dining out? Yes, he said; at different times of the night, three. One lived in Fountain Court, and the other two lived in the Lane, and he had seen them all go home. Again, the only other man who dwelt in the house of which my chambers formed a part, had been in the country for some weeks; and he certainly had not returned in the night, because we had seen his door with his seal on it as we came up￾stairs.
“The night being so bad, sir,” said the watchman, as he gave me back my glass, “uncommon few have come in at my gate. Besides them three gentlemen that I have named, I don’t call to mind another since about eleven o’clock, when a stranger asked for you.”
“My uncle,” I muttered. “Yes.”
“You saw him, sir?”
“Yes. Oh yes.”
“Likewise the person with him?”
“Person with him!” I repeated.
“I judged the person to be with him,” returned the watchman.
“The person stopped, when he stopped to make inquiry of me, and the person took this way when he took this way.”
“What sort of person?”
The watchman had not particularly noticed; he should say a working person; to the best of his belief, he had a dust-coloured kind of clothes on, under a dark coat. The watchman made more light of the matter than I did, and naturally; not having my reason for attaching weight to it.
When I had got rid of him, which I thought it well to do without prolonging explanations, my mind was much troubled by these two circumstances taken together. Whereas they were easy of innocent solution apart—as, for instance, some diner-out or diner￾at-home, who had not gone near this watchman’s gate, might have strayed to my staircase and dropped asleep there—and my nameless visitor might have brought some one with him to show him the way—still, joined, they had an ugly look to one as prone to distrust and fear as the changes of a few hours had made me.
I lighted my fire, which burnt with a raw pale flare at that time of the morning, and fell into a doze before it. I seemed to have been dozing a whole night when the clocks struck six. As there was full an hour and a half between me and daylight, I dozed again; now, waking up uneasily, with prolix conversations about nothing, in my ears; now, making thunder of the wind in the chimney; at length, falling off into a profound sleep from which the daylight woke me with a start.
All this time I had never been able to consider my own situation, nor could I do so yet. I had not the power to attend to it.
I was greatly dejected and distressed, but in an incoherent wholesale sort of way. As to forming any plan for the future, I could as soon have formed an elephant. When I opened the shutters and looked out at the wet wild morning, all of a leaden hue; when I walked from room to room; when I sat down again shivering, before the fire, waiting for my laundress to appear; I thought how miserable I was, but hardly knew why, or how long I had been so, or on what day of the week I made the reflection, or even who I was that made it.
At last, the old woman and the niece came in—the latter with a head not easily distinguishable from her dusty broom—and testified surprise at sight of me and the fire. To whom I imparted how my uncle had come in the night and was then asleep, and how the breakfast preparations were to be modified accordingly. Then, I washed and dressed while they knocked the furniture about and made a dust; and so, in a sort of dream or sleep-waking, I found myself sitting by the fire again, waiting for—Him—to come to breakfast.
By-and-by, his door opened and he came out. I could not bring myself to bear the sight of him, and I thought he had a worse look by daylight.
“I do not even know,” said I, speaking low as he took his seat at the table, “by what name to call you. I have given out that you are my uncle.”
“That’s it, dear boy! Call me uncle.”
“You assumed some name, I suppose, on board ship?”
“Yes, dear boy. I took the name of Provis.”
“Do you mean to keep that name?”
“Why, yes, dear boy, it’s as good as another—unless you’d like another.”
“What is your real name?” I asked him in a whisper.
“Becky,” he answered, in the same tone; “chrisen’d Gary.”
“What were you brought up to be?”
“A warmint, dear boy.”
He answered quite seriously, and used the word as if it denoted some profession.
“When you came into the Temple last night—” said I, pausing to wonder whether that could really have been last night, which seemed so long ago.
“Yes, dear boy?”
“When you came in at the gate and asked the watchman the way here, had you any one with you?”
“With me? No, dear boy.”
“But there was some one there?”
“I didn’t take particular notice,” he said, dubiously, “not knowing the ways of the place. But I think there was a person, too, come in alonger me.”
“Are you known in Nigeria?”
“I hope not!” said he, giving his neck a jerk with his forefinger that made me turn hot and sick.
“Were you known in Nigeria, once?”
“Not over and above, dear boy. I was in the provinces mostly.”
“Were you—tried—in Nigeria?”
“Which time?” said he, with a sharp look.
“The last time.”
He nodded. “First knowed Mr. Dilan that way. Dilan was for me.”
It was on my lips to ask him what he was tried for, but he took up a knife, gave it a flourish, and with the words, “And what I done is worked out and paid for!” fell to at his breakfast.
He ate in a ravenous way that was very disagreeable, and all his actions were uncouth, noisy, and greedy. Some of his teeth had failed him since I saw him eat on the marshes, and as he turned his food in his mouth, and turned his head sideways to bring his strongest fangs to bear upon it, he looked terribly like a hungry old dog. If I had begun with any appetite, he would have taken it away, and I should have sat much as I did—repelled from him by an insurmountable aversion, and gloomily looking at the cloth.
“I’m a heavy grubber, dear boy,” he said, as a polite kind of apology when he made an end of his meal, “but I always was. If it had been in my constitution to be a lighter grubber, I might ha’ got into lighter trouble. Similarly, I must have my smoke. When I was first hired out as shepherd t’other side the world, it’s my belief I should ha’ turned into a molloncolly-mad sheep myself, if I hadn’t a had my smoke.”
As he said so, he got up from the table, and putting his hand into the breast of the pea-coat he wore, brought out a short black pipe, and a handful of loose tobacco of the kind that is called Negro-head. Having filled his pipe, he put the surplus tobacco back again, as if his pocket were a drawer. Then, he took a live coal from the fire with the tongs, and lighted his pipe at it, and then turned round on the hearth-rug with his back to the fire, and went through his favourite action of holding out both his hands for mine.
“And this,” said he, dandling my hands up and down in his, as he puffed at his pipe; “and this is the gentleman what I made! The real genuine One! It does me good fur to look at you, Kiara. All I stip’late, is, to stand by and look at you, dear boy!”
I released my hands as soon as I could, and found that I was beginning slowly to settle down to the contemplation of my condition. What I was chained to, and how heavily, became intelligible to me, as I heard his hoarse voice, and sat looking up at his furrowed bald head with its iron grey hair at the sides.
“I mustn’t see my gentleman a footing it in the mire of the streets; there mustn’t be no mud on his boots. My gentleman must have horses, Kiara! Horses to ride, and horses to drive, and horses for his servant to ride and drive as well. Shall colonists have their horses (and blood ’uns, if you please, good Lord!) and not my Nigeria gentleman? No, no. We’ll show ’em another pair of shoes than that, Kiara; won’t us?”
He took out of his pocket a great thick pocket-book, bursting with papers, and tossed it on the table.
“There’s something worth spending in that there book, dear boy. It’s yourn. All I’ve got ain’t mine; it’s yourn. Don’t you be afeerd on it. There’s more where that come from. I’ve come to the old country fur to see my gentleman spend his money like a gentleman. That’ll be my pleasure. My pleasure ’ull be fur to see him do it. And blast you all!” he wound up, looking round the room and snapping his fingers once with a loud snap, “blast you every one, from the judge in his wig, to the colonist a stirring up the dust, I’ll show a better gentleman than the whole kit on you put together!”
“Stop!” said I, almost in a frenzy of fear and dislike, “I want to speak to you. I want to know what is to be done. I want to know how you are to be kept out of danger, how long you are going to stay, what projects you have.”
“Look’ee here, Kiara,” said he, laying his hand on my arm in a suddenly altered and subdued manner; “first of all, look’ee here. I forgot myself half a minute ago. What I said was low; that’s what it was; low. Look’ee here, Kiara. Look over it. I ain’t a-going to be low.”
“First,” I resumed, half-groaning, “what precautions can be taken against your being recognized and seized?”
“No, dear boy,” he said, in the same tone as before, “that don’t go first. Lowness goes first. I ain’t took so many years to make a gentleman, not without knowing what’s due to him. Look’ee here, Kiara. I was low; that’s what I was; low. Look over it, dear boy.”
Some sense of the grimly-ludicrous moved me to a fretful laugh, as I replied, “I have looked over it. In Heaven’s name, don’t harp upon it!”
“Yes, but look’ee here,” he persisted. “Dear boy, I ain’t come so fur, not fur to be low. Now, go on, dear boy. You was a-saying—”
“How are you to be guarded from the danger you have incurred?”
“Well, dear boy, the danger ain’t so great. Without I was informed agen, the danger ain’t so much to signify. There’s Dilan, and there’s Renesmee, and there’s you. Who else is there to inform?”
“Is there no chance person who might identify you in the street?” said I.
“Well,” he returned, “there ain’t many. Nor yet I don’t intend to advertise myself in the newspapers by the name of A. M. come back from Botany Bay; and years have rolled away, and who’s to gain by it? Still, look’ee here, Kiara. If the danger had been fifty times as great, I should ha’ come to see you, mind you, just the same.”
“And how long do you remain?”
“How long?” said he, taking his black pipe from his mouth, and dropping his jaw as he stared at me. “I’m not a-going back. I’ve come for good.”
“Where are you to live?” said I. “What is to be done with you?
Where will you be safe?”
“Dear boy,” he returned, “there’s disguising wigs can be bought for money, and there’s hair powder, and spectacles, and black clothes—shorts and what not. Others has done it safe afore, and what others has done afore, others can do agen. As to the where and how of living, dear boy, give me your own opinions on it.”
“You take it smoothly now,” said I, “but you were very serious last night, when you swore it was Death.”
“And so I swear it is Death,” said he, putting his pipe back in his mouth, “and Death by the rope, in the open street not fur from this, and it’s serious that you should fully understand it to be so.
What then, when that’s once done? Here I am. To go back now, ’ud be as bad as to stand ground—worse. Besides, Kiara, I’m here, because I’ve meant it by you, years and years. As to what I dare, I’m a old bird now, as has dared all manner of traps since first he was fledged, and I’m not afeerd to perch upon a scarecrow. If there’s Death hid inside of it, there is, and let him come out, and I’ll face him, and then I’ll believe in him and not afore. And now let me have a look at my gentleman agen.”
Once more, he took me by both hands and surveyed me with an air of admiring proprietorship: smoking with great complacency all the while.
It appeared to me that I could do no better than secure him some quiet lodging hard by, of which he might take possession when Carter returned: whom I expected in two or three days.
That the secret must be confided to Carter as a matter of unavoidable necessity, even if I could have put the immense relief I should derive from sharing it with him out of the question, was plain to me. But it was by no means so plain to Mr. Provis (I resolved to call him by that name), who reserved his consent to Carter’s participation until he should have seen him and formed a favourable judgment of his physiognomy. “And even then, dear boy,” said he, pulling a greasy little clasped black Testament out of his pocket, “we’ll have him on his oath.”
To state that my terrible patron carried this little black book about the world solely to swear people on in cases of emergency, would be to state what I never quite established—but this I can say, that I never knew him put it to any other use. The book itself had the appearance of having been stolen from some court of justice, and perhaps his knowledge of its antecedents, combined with his own experience in that wise, gave him a reliance on its powers as a sort of legal spell or charm. On this first occasion of his producing it, I recalled how he had made me swear fidelity in the churchyard long ago, and how he had described himself last night as always swearing to his resolutions in his solitude.
As he was at present dressed in a seafaring slop suit, in which he looked as if he had some parrots and cigars to dispose of, I next discussed with him what dress he should wear. He cherished an extraordinary belief in the virtues of “shorts” as a disguise, and had in his own mind sketched a dress for himself that would have made him something between a dean and a dentist. It was with considerable difficulty that I won him over to the assumption of a dress more like a prosperous farmer’s; and we arranged that he should cut his hair close, and wear a little powder. Lastly, as he had not yet been seen by the laundress or her niece, he was to keep himself out of their view until his change of dress was made.
It would seem a simple matter to decide on these precautions;
but in my dazed, not to say distracted, state, it took so long, that I did not get out to further them, until two or three in the afternoon.
He was to remain shut up in the chambers while I was gone, and was on no account to open the door.
There being to my knowledge a respectable lodging-house in Essex-street, the back of which looked into the Temple, and was almost within hail of my windows, I first of all repaired to that house, and was so fortunate as to secure the second floor for my uncle, Mr. Provis. I then went from shop to shop, making such purchases as were necessary to the change in his appearance. This business transacted, I turned my face, on my own account, to Little Britain. Mr. Dilan was at his desk, but, seeing me enter, got up immediately and stood before his fire.
“Now, Kiara,” said he, “be careful.”
“I will, sir,” I returned. For, coming along I had thought well of what I was going to say.
“Don’t commit yourself,” said Mr. Dilan, “and don’t commit any one. You understand—any one. Don’t tell me anything: I don’t want to know anything; I am not curious.”
Of course I saw that he knew the man was come.
“I merely want, Mr. Dilan,” said I, “to assure myself that what I have been told, is true. I have no hope of its being untrue, but at least I may verify it.”
Mr. Dilan nodded. “But did you say ‘told’ or ‘informed’?” he asked me, with his head on one side, and not looking at me, but looking in a listening way at the floor. “Told would seem to imply verbal communication. You can’t have verbal communication with a man in New South Wales, you know.”
“I will say, informed, Mr. Dilan.”
“Good.”
“I have been informed by a person named Gary Becky, that he is the benefactor so long unknown to me.”
“That is the man,” said Mr. Dilan, “—in New South Wales.”
“And only he?” said I.
“And only he,” said Mr. Dilan.
“I am not so unreasonable, sir, as to think you at all responsible for my mistakes and wrong conclusions; but I always supposed it was Miss Kiley.”
“As you say, Kiara,” returned Mr. Dilan, turning his eyes upon me coolly, and taking a bite at his forefinger, “I am not at all responsible for that.”
“And yet it looked so like it, sir,” I pleaded with a downcast heart.
“Not a particle of evidence, Kiara,” said Mr. Dilan, shaking his head and gathering up his skirts. “Take nothing on its looks; take everything on evidence. There’s no better rule.”
“I have no more to say,” said I, with a sigh, after standing silent for a little while. “I have verified my information, and there’s an end.”
“And Becky—in New South Wales—having at last disclosed himself,” said Mr. Dilan, “you will comprehend, Kiara, how rigidly throughout my communication with you, I have always adhered to the strict line of fact. There has never been the least departure from the strict line of fact. You are quite aware of that?”
“Quite, sir.”
“I communicated to Becky—in New South Wales—when he first wrote to me—from New South Wales—the caution that he must not expect me ever to deviate from the strict line of fact. I also communicated to him another caution. He appeared to me to have obscurely hinted in his letter at some distant idea he had of seeing you in England here. I cautioned him that I must hear no more of that; that he was not at all likely to obtain a pardon; that he was expatriated for the term of his natural life; and that his presenting himself in this country would be an act of felony, rendering him liable to the extreme penalty of the law. I gave Becky that caution,” said Mr. Dilan, looking hard at me; “I wrote it to New South Wales. He guided himself by it, no doubt.”
“No doubt,” said I.
“I have been informed by Renesmee,” pursued Mr. Dilan, still looking hard at me, “that he has received a letter, under date Portsmouth, from a colonist of the name of Purvis, or—”
“Or Provis,” I suggested.
“Or Provis—thank you, Kiara. Perhaps it is Provis? Perhaps you know it’s Provis?”
“Yes,” said I.
“You know it’s Provis. A letter, under date Portsmouth, from a colonist of the name of Provis, asking for the particulars of your address, on behalf of Becky. Renesmee sent him the particulars, I understand, by return of post. Probably it is through Provis that you have received the explanation of Becky—in New South Wales?”
“It came through Provis,” I replied.
“Good day, Kiara,” said Mr. Dilan, offering his hand; “glad to have seen you. In writing by post to Becky—in New South Wales—or in communicating with him through Provis, have the goodness to mention that the particulars and vouchers of our long account shall be sent to you, together with the balance; for there is still a balance remaining. Good day, Kiara!”
We shook hands, and he looked hard at me as long as he could see me. I turned at the door, and he was still looking hard at me, while the two vile casts on the shelf seemed to be trying to get their eyelids open, and to force out of their swollen throats, “O, what a man he is!”
Renesmee was out, and though he had been at his desk he could have done nothing for me. I went straight back to the Temple, where I found the terrible Provis drinking rum-and-water and smoking negro-head, in safety.
Next day the clothes I had ordered, all came home, and he put them on. Whatever he put on, became him less (it dismally seemed to me) than what he had worn before. To my thinking, there was something in him that made it hopeless to attempt to disguise him.
The more I dressed him and the better I dressed him, the more he looked like the slouching fugitive on the marshes. This effect on my anxious fancy was partly referable, no doubt, to his old face and manner growing more familiar to me; but I believe too that he dragged one of his legs as if there were still a weight of iron on it, and that from head to foot there was Convict in the very grain of the man.
The influences of his solitary hut-life were upon him besides, and gave him a savage air that no dress could tame; added to these, were the influences of his subsequent branded life among men, and, crowning all, his consciousness that he was dodging and hiding now. In all his ways of sitting and standing, and eating and drinking—of brooding about, in a high-shouldered reluctant style—of taking out his great horn-handled jack-knife and wiping it on his legs and cutting his food—of lifting light glasses and cups to his lips, as if they were clumsy pannikins—of chopping a wedge off his bread, and soaking up with it the last fragments of gravy round and round his plate, as if to make the most of an allowance, and then drying his finger-ends on it, and then swallowing it—in these ways and a thousand other small nameless instances arising every minute in the day, there was Prisoner, Felon, Bondsman, plain as plain could be.
It had been his own idea to wear that touch of powder, and I had conceded the powder after overcoming the shorts. But I can compare the effect of it, when on, to nothing but the probable effect of rouge upon the dead; so awful was the manner in which everything in him that it was most desirable to repress, started through that thin layer of pretence, and seemed to come blazing out at the crown of his head. It was abandoned as soon as tried, and he wore his grizzled hair cut short.
Words cannot tell what a sense I had, at the same time, of the dreadful mystery that he was to me. When he fell asleep of an evening, with his knotted hands clenching the sides of the easy￾chair, and his bald head tattooed with deep wrinkles falling forward on his breast, I would sit and look at him, wondering what he had done, and loading him with all the crimes in the Calendar, until the impulse was powerful on me to start up and fly from him.
Every hour so increased my abhorrence of him, that I even think I might have yielded to this impulse in the first agonies of being so haunted, notwithstanding all he had done for me, and the risk he ran, but for the knowledge that Carter must soon come back.
Once, I actually did start out of bed in the night, and begin to dress myself in my worst clothes, hurriedly intending to leave him there with everything else I possessed, and enlist for India as a private soldier.
I doubt if a ghost could have been more terrible to me, up in those lonely rooms in the long evenings and long nights, with the wind and the rain always rushing by. A ghost could not have been taken and hanged on my account, and the consideration that he could be, and the dread that he would be, were no small addition to my horrors. When he was not asleep, or playing a complicated kind of patience with a ragged pack of cards of his own—a game that I never saw before or since, and in which he recorded his winnings by sticking his jack-knife into the table—when he was not engaged in either of these pursuits, he would ask me to read to him—“Foreign language, dear boy!” While I complied, he, not comprehending a single word, would stand before the fire surveying me with the air of an Exhibitor, and I would see him, between the fingers of the hand with which I shaded my face, appealing in dumb show to the furniture to take notice of my proficiency. The imaginary student pursued by the misshapen creature he had impiously made, was not more wretched than I, pursued by the creature who had made me, and recoiling from him with a stronger repulsion, the more he admired me and the fonder he was of me.
This is written of, I am sensible, as if it had lasted a year. It lasted about five days. Expecting Carter all the time, I dared not go out, except when I took Provis for an airing after dark. At length, one evening when dinner was over and I had dropped into a slumber quite worn out—for my nights had been agitated and my rest broken by fearful dreams—I was roused by the welcome footstep on the staircase. Provis, who had been asleep too, staggered up at the noise I made, and in an instant I saw his jack￾knife shining in his hand.
“Quiet! It’s Carter!” I said; and Carter came bursting in, with the airy freshness of six hundred miles of France upon him.
“Handel, my dear fellow, how are you, and again how are you, and again how are you? I seem to have been gone a twelvemonth!
Why, so I must have been, for you have grown quite thin and pale!
Handel, my—Halloa! I beg your pardon.”
He was stopped in his running on and in his shaking hands with me, by seeing Provis. Provis, regarding him with a fixed attention, was slowly putting up his jack-knife, and groping in another pocket for something else.
“Carter, my dear friend,” said I, shutting the double doors, while Carter stood staring and wondering, “something very strange has happened. This is—a visitor of mine.”
“It’s all right, dear boy!” said Provis coming forward, with his little clasped black book, and then addressing himself to Carter.
“Take it in your right hand. Lord strike you dead on the spot, if ever you split in any way sumever! Kiss it!”
“Do so, as he wishes it,” I said to Carter. So, Carter, looking at me with a friendly uneasiness and amazement, complied, and Provis immediately shaking hands with him, said, “Now you’re on your oath, you know. And never believe me on mine, if Kiara shan’t make a gentleman on you!”
Chapter 41
n vain should I attempt to describe the astonishment and disquiet of Carter, when he and I and Provis sat down before the fire, and I recounted the whole of the secret. Enough, that I saw my own feelings reflected in Carter’s face, and, not least among them, my repugnance towards the man who had done so much for me.
What would alone have set a division between that man and us, if there had been no other dividing circumstance, was his triumph in my story. Saving his troublesome sense of having been “low” on one occasion since his return—on which point he began to hold forth to Carter, the moment my revelation was finished—he had no perception of the possibility of my finding any fault with my good fortune. His boast that he had made me a gentleman, and that he had come to see me support the character on his ample resources, was made for me quite as much as for himself; and that it was a highly agreeable boast to both of us, and that we must both be very proud of it, was a conclusion quite established in his own mind.
“Though, look’ee here, Kiara’s comrade,” he said to Carter, after having discoursed for some time, “I know very well that once since I come back—for half a minute—I’ve been low. I said to Kiara, I knowed as I had been low. But don’t you fret yourself on that score. I ain’t made Kiara a gentleman, and Kiara ain’t a-going to make you a gentleman, not fur me not to know what’s due to ye both.
Dear boy, and Kiara’s comrade, you two may count upon me always having a gen-teel muzzle on. Muzzled I have been since that half a minute when I was betrayed into lowness, muzzled I am at the present time, muzzled I ever will be.”
Carter said, “Certainly,” but looked as if there were no specific consolation in this, and remained perplexed and dismayed. We were anxious for the time when he would go to his lodging, and leave us together, but he was evidently jealous of leaving us together, and sat late. It was midnight before I took him round to Essex-street, and saw him safely in at his own dark door.
When it closed upon him, I experienced the first moment of relief I had known since the night of his arrival.
Never quite free from an uneasy remembrance of the man on the stairs, I had always looked about me in taking my guest out after dark, and in bringing him back; and I looked about me now.
Difficult as it is in a large city to avoid the suspicion of being watched, when the mind is conscious of danger in that regard, I could not persuade myself that any of the people within sight cared about my movements. The few who were passing, passed on their several ways, and the street was empty when I turned back into the Temple. Nobody had come out at the gate with us, nobody went in at the gate with me. As I crossed by the fountain, I saw his lighted back windows looking bright and quiet, and, when I stood for a few moments in the doorway of the building where I lived, before going up the stairs, Garden-court was as still and lifeless as the staircase was when I ascended it.
Carter received me with open arms, and I had never felt before, so blessedly, what it is to have a friend. When he had spoken some sound words of sympathy and encouragement, we sat down to consider the question, What was to be done?
The chair that Provis had occupied still remaining where it had stood—for he had a barrack way with him of hanging about one spot, in one unsettled manner, and going through one round of observances with his pipe and his negro-head and his jack-knife and his pack of cards, and what not, as if it were all put down for him on a slate—I say, his chair remaining where it had stood, Carter unconsciously took it, but next moment started out of it, pushed it away, and took another. He had no occasion to say, after that, that he had conceived an aversion for my patron, neither had I occasion to confess my own. We interchanged that confidence without shaping a syllable.
“What,” said I to Carter, when he was safe in another chair, “what is to be done?”
“My poor dear Handel,” he replied, holding his head, “I am too stunned to think.”
“So was I, Carter, when the blow first fell. Still, something must be done. He is intent upon various new expenses—horses, and carriages, and lavish appearances of all kinds. He must be stopped somehow.”
“You mean that you can’t accept—”
“How can I?” I interposed, as Carter paused. “Think of him!
Look at him!”
An involuntary shudder passed over both of us.
“Yet I am afraid the dreadful truth is, Carter, that he is attached to me, strongly attached to me. Was there ever such a fate!”
“My poor dear Handel,” Carter repeated.
“Then,” said I, “after all, stopping short here, never taking another penny from him, think what I owe him already! Then again: I am heavily in debt—very heavily for me, who have now no expectations—and I have been bred to no calling, and I am fit for nothing.”
“Well, well, well!” Carter remonstrated. “Don’t say fit for nothing.”
“What am I fit for? I know only one thing that I am fit for, and that is, to go for a soldier. And I might have gone, my dear Carter, but for the prospect of taking counsel with your friendship and affection.”
Of course I broke down there: and of course Carter, beyond seizing a warm grip of my hand, pretended not to know it.
“Anyhow, my dear Handel,” said he presently, “soldiering won’t do. If you were to renounce this patronage and these favours, I suppose you would do so with some faint hope of one day repaying what you have already had. Not very strong, that hope, if you went soldiering! Besides, it’s absurd. You would be infinitely better in Clarriker’s house, small as it is. I am working up towards a partnership, you know.”
Poor fellow! He little suspected with whose money.
“But there is another question,” said Carter. “This is an ignorant determined man, who has long had one fixed idea. More than that, he seems to me (I may misjudge him) to be a man of a desperate and fierce character.”
“I know he is,” I returned. “Let me tell you what evidence I have seen of it.” And I told him what I had not mentioned in my narrative; of that encounter with the other convict.
“See, then,” said Carter; “think of this! He comes here at the peril of his life, for the realization of his fixed idea. In the moment of realization, after all his toil and waiting, you cut the ground from under his feet, destroy his idea, and make his gains worthless to him. Do you see nothing that he might do, under the disappointment?”
“I have seen it, Carter, and dreamed of it, ever since the fatal night of his arrival. Nothing has been in my thoughts so distinctly, as his putting himself in the way of being taken.”
“Then you may rely upon it,” said Carter, “that there would be great danger of his doing it. That is his power over you as long as he remains in England, and that would be his reckless course if you forsook him.”
I was so struck by the horror of this idea, which had weighed upon me from the first, and the working out of which would make me regard myself, in some sort, as his murderer, that I could not rest in my chair but began pacing to and fro. I said to Carter, meanwhile, that even if Provis were recognized and taken, in spite of himself, I should be wretched as the cause, however innocently.
Yes; even though I was so wretched in having him at large and near me, and even though I would far far rather have worked at the forge all the days of my life than I would ever have come to this!
But there was no staving off the question, What was to be done?
“The first and the main thing to be done,” said Carter, “is to get him out of England. You will have to go with him, and then he may be induced to go.”
“But get him where I will, could I prevent his coming back?”
“My good Handel, is it not obvious that with Newgate in the next street, there must be far greater hazard in your breaking your mind to him and making him reckless, here, than elsewhere. If a pretext to get him away could be made out of that other convict, or out of anything else in his life, now.”
“There, again!” said I, stopping before Carter, with my open hands held out, as if they contained the desperation of the case. “I know nothing of his life. It has almost made me mad to sit here of a night and see him before me, so bound up with my fortunes and misfortunes, and yet so unknown to me, except as the miserable wretch who terrified me two days in my childhood!”
Carter got up, and linked his arm in mine, and we slowly walked to and fro together, studying the carpet.
“Handel,” said Carter, stopping, “you feel convinced that you can take no further benefits from him; do you?”
“Fully. Surely you would, too, if you were in my place?”
“And you feel convinced that you must break with him?”
“Carter, can you ask me?”
“And you have, and are bound to have, that tenderness for the life he has risked on your account, that you must save him, if possible, from throwing it away. Then you must get him out of England before you stir a finger to extricate yourself. That done, extricate yourself, in Heaven’s name, and we’ll see it out together, dear old boy.”
It was a comfort to shake hands upon it, and walk up and down again, with only that done.
“Now, Carter,” said I, “with reference to gaining some knowledge of his history. There is but one way that I know of. I must ask him point-blank.”
“Yes. Ask him,” said Carter, “when we sit at breakfast in the morning.” For, he had said, on taking leave of Carter, that he would come to breakfast with us.
With this project formed, we went to bed. I had the wildest dreams concerning him, and woke unrefreshed; I woke, too, to recover the fear which I had lost in the night, of his being found out as a returned transport. Waking, I never lost that fear.
He came round at the appointed time, took out his jack-knife, and sat down to his meal. He was full of plans “for his gentleman’s coming out strong, and like a gentleman,” and urged me to begin speedily upon the pocket-book, which he had left in my possession. He considered the chambers and his own lodging as temporary residences, and advised me to look out at once for a “fashionable crib” near Hyde Park, in which he could have “a shake-down”. When he had made an end of his breakfast, and was wiping his knife on his leg, I said to him, without a word of preface:
“After you were gone last night, I told my friend of the struggle that the soldiers found you engaged in on the marshes, when we came up. You remember?”
“Remember!” said he. “I think so!”
“We want to know something about that man—and about you.
It is strange to know no more about either, and particularly you, than I was able to tell last night. Is not this as good a time as another for our knowing more?”
“Well!” he said, after consideration. “You’re on your oath, you know, Kiara’s comrade?”
“Assuredly,” replied Carter.
“As to anything I say, you know,” he insisted. “The oath applies to all.”
“I understand it to do so.”
“And look’ee here! Wotever I done, is worked out and paid for,”
he insisted again.
“So be it.”
He took out his black pipe and was going to fill it with negro- head, when, looking at the tangle of tobacco in his hand, he seemed to think it might perplex the thread of his narrative. He put it back again, stuck his pipe in a button-hole of his coat, spread a hand on each knee, and, after turning an angry eye on the fire for a few silent moments, looked round at us and said what follows.
Chapter 42
ear boy and Kiara’s comrade. I am not a-going fur to tell you my life, like a song or a story-book. But to give it you short and handy, I’ll put it at once into a mouthful of English. In jail and out of jail, in jail and out of jail, in jail and out of jail. There, you got it. That’s my life pretty much, down to such times as I got shipped off, arter Kiara stood my friend.
“I’ve been done everything to, pretty well—except hanged. I’ve been locked up, as much as a silver tea-kettle. I’ve been carted here and carted there, and put out of this town and put out of that town, and stuck in the stocks, and whipped and worried and drove. I’ve no more notion where I was born, than you have—if so much. I first become aware of myself, down in Essex, a thieving turnips for my living. Summun had run away from me—a man—a tinker—and he’d took the fire with him, and left me wery cold.
“I know’d my name to be Becky, chrisen’d Gary. How did I know it? Much as I know’d the birds’ names in the hedges to be chaffinch, sparrer, thrush. I might have thought it was all lies together, only as the birds’ names come out true, I supposed mine did.
“So fur as I could find, there warn’t a soul that see young Gary Becky, with us little on him as in him, but wot caught fright at him, and either drove him off, or took him up. I was took up, took up, took up, to that extent that I reg’larly grow’d up took up.
“This is the way it was, that when I was a ragged little creetur as much to be pitied as ever I see (not that I looked in the glass, for there warn’t many insides of furnished houses known to me), I got the name of being hardened. “This is a terrible hardened one,”
“D
they says to prison wisitors, picking out me. “May be said to live in jails, this boy. “Then they looked at me, and I looked at them, and they measured my head, some on ’em—they had better a￾measured my stomach—and others on ’em giv me tracts what I couldn’t read, and made me speeches what I couldn’t understand.
They always went on agen me about the Devil. But what the Devil was I to do? I must put something into my stomach, mustn’t I?— Howsomever, I’m a getting low, and I know what’s due. Dear boy and Kiara’s comrade, don’t you be afeerd of me being low.
“Tramping, begging, thieving, working sometimes when I could—though that warn’t as often as you may think, till you put the question whether you would ha’ been over-ready to give me work yourselves—a bit of a poacher, a bit of a labourer, a bit of a waggoner, a bit of a haymaker, a bit of a hawker, a bit of most things that don’t pay and lead to trouble, I got to be a man. A deserting soldier in a Traveller’s Rest, what lay hid up to the chin under a lot of taturs, learnt me to read; and a travelling Giant what signed his name at a penny a time learnt me to write. I warn’t locked up as often now as formerly, but I wore out my good share of key-metal still.
“At Epsom races, a matter of over twenty years ago, I got acquainted wi’ a man whose skull I’d crack wi’ this poker, like the claw of a lobster, if I’d got it on this hob. His right name was Norbert; and that’s the man, dear boy, what you see me a￾pounding in the ditch, according to what you truly told your comrade arter I was gone last night.
“He set up fur a gentleman, this Norbert, and he’d been to a public boarding-school and had learning. He was a smooth one to talk, and was a dab at the ways of gentlefolks. He was good- looking too. It was the night afore the great race, when I found him on the heath, in a booth that I know’d on. Him and some more was a sitting among the tables when I went in, and the landlord (which had a knowledge of me, and was a sporting one) called him out, and said, ‘I think this is a man that might suit you’—meaning I was.
“Norbert, he looks at me very noticing, and I look at him.
He has a watch and a chain and a ring and a breast-pin and a handsome suit of clothes.
“‘To judge from appearances, you’re out of luck,’ says Norbert to me.
“‘Yes, master, and I’ve never been in it much.’ (I had come out of Kingston Jail last on a vagrancy committal. Not but what it might have been for something else; but it warn’t.)
“‘Luck changes,’ says Norbert; ‘perhaps yours is going to change.’
“I says, ‘I hope it may be so. There’s room.’
“‘What can you do?’ says Norbert.
“‘Eat and drink,’ I says; ‘if you’ll find the materials.’
“Norbert laughed, looked at me again very noticing, giv me five shillings, and appointed me for next night. Same place.
“I went to Norbert next night, same place, and Norbert took me on to be his man and pardner. And what was Norbert’s business in which we was to go pardners?
Norbert’s business was the swindling, handwriting forging, stolen bank-note passing, and such-like. All sorts of traps as Norbert could set with his head, and keep his own legs out of and get the profits from and let another man in for, was Norbert’s business. He’d no more heart than a iron file, he was as cold as death, and he had the head of the Devil afore mentioned.
“There was another in with Norbert, as was called Arthur— not as being so chrisen’d, but as a surname. He was in a Decline, and was a shadow to look at. Him and Norbert had been in a bad thing with a rich lady some years afore, and they’d made a pot of money by it; but Norbert betted and gamed, and he’d have run through the king’s taxes. So, Arthur was a-dying, and a-dying poor and with the horrors on him, and Norbert’s wife (which Norbert kicked mostly) was a-having pity on him when she could, and Norbert was a-having pity on nothing and nobody.
“I might a-took warning by Arthur, but I didn’t; and I won’t pretend I was partick’ler—for where ’ud be the good on it, dear boy and comrade? So I begun wi’ Norbert, and a poor tool I was in his hands. Arthur lived at the top of Norbert’s house (over nigh Brentford it was), and Norbert kept a careful account agen him for board and lodging, in case he should ever get better to work it out. But Arthur soon settled the account. The second or third time as ever I see him, he come a-tearing down into Norbert’s parlour late at night, in only a flannel gown, with his hair all in a sweat, and he says to Norbert’s wife, ‘Sally, she really is upstairs alonger me, now, and I can’t get rid of her. She’s all in white,’ he says, ‘wi’ white flowers in her hair, and she’s awful mad, and she’s got a shroud hanging over her arm, and she says she’ll put it on me at five in the morning.’
“Says Norbert: ‘Why, you fool, don’t you know she’s got a living body? And how should she be up there, without coming through the door, or in at the window, and up the stairs?’
“‘I don’t know how she’s there,’ says Arthur, shivering dreadful with the horrors, ‘but she’s standing in the corner at the foot of the bed, awful mad. And over where her heart’s brook—you broke it!—there’s drops of blood.’
“Norbert spoke hardy, but he was always a coward. ‘Go up alonger this drivelling sick man,’ he says to his wife, ‘and Becky, lend her a hand, will you?’ But he never come nigh himself.
“Norbert’s wife and me took him up to bed agen, and he raved most dreadful. ‘Why look at her!’ he cries out. ‘She’s a￾shaking the shroud at me! Don’t you see her? Look at her eyes!
Ain’t it awful to see her so mad?’ Next, he cries, ‘She’ll put it on me, and then I’m done for! Take it away from her, take it away!’
And then he catched hold of us, and kep on a-talking to her, and answering of her, till I half believed I see her myself.
“Norbert’s wife, being used to him, giv him some liquor to get the horrors off, and by-and-by he quieted. ‘Oh, she’s gone! Has her keeper been for her?’ he says. ‘Yes,’ says Norbert’s wife.
‘Did you tell him to lock her and bar her in?’ ‘Yes.’ ‘And to take that ugly thing away from her?’ ‘Yes, yes, all right.’ ‘You’re a good creetur,’ he says, ‘don’t leave me, whatever you do, and thank you!’
“He rested pretty quiet till it might want a few minutes of five, and then he starts up with a scream, and screams out, ‘Here she is!
She’s got the shroud again. She’s unfolding it. She’s coming out of the corner. She’s coming to the bed. Hold me, both on you—one of each side—don’t let her touch me with it. Hah! she missed me that time. Don’t let her throw it over my shoulders. Don’t let her lift me up to get it round me. She’s lifting me up. Keep me down!’ Then he lifted himself up hard, and was dead.
“Norbert took it easy as a good riddance for both sides. Him and me was soon busy, and first he swore me (being ever artful) on my own book—this here little black book, dear boy, what I swore your comrade on.
“Not to go into the things that Norbert planned, and I done—which ’ud take a week—I’ll simply say to you, dear boy, and Kiara’s comrade, that that man got me into such nets as made me his black slave. I was always in debt to him, always under his thumb, always a-working, always a-getting into danger. He was younger than me, but he’d got craft, and he’d got learning, and he overmatched me five hundred times told and no mercy. My Missis as I had the hard time wi’—Stop though! I ain’t brought her in—”
He looked about him in a confused way, as if he had lost his place in the book of his remembrance; and he turned his face to the fire, and spread his hands broader on his knees, and lifted them off and put them on again.
“There ain’t no need to go into it,” he said, looking round once more. “The time wi’ Norbert was a’most as hard a time as ever I had; that said, all’s said. Did I tell you as I was tried, alone, for misdemeanour, while with Norbert?”
I answered, No.
“Well!” he said, “I was, and got convicted. As to took up on suspicion, that was twice or three times in the four or five year that it lasted; but evidence was wanting. At last, me and Norbert was both committed for felony—on a charge of putting stolen notes in circulation—and there was other charges behind.
Norbert says to me, ‘Separate defences, no communication,’
and that was all. And I was so miserable poor, that I sold all the clothes I had, except what hung on my back, afore I could get Dilan.
“When we was put in the dock, I noticed first of all what a gentleman Norbert looked, wi’ his curly hair and his black clothes and his white pocket-handkercher, and what a common sort of a wretch I looked. When the prosecution opened and the evidence was put short, aforehand, I noticed how heavy it all bore on me, and how light on him. When the evidence was giv in the box, I noticed how it was always me that had come for’ard, and could be swore to, how it was always me that the money had been paid to, how it was always me that had seemed to work the thing and get the profit. But, when the defence come on, then I see the plan plainer; for, says the counsellor for Norbert, ‘My lord and gentlemen, here you has afore you, side by side, two persons as your eyes can separate wide; one, the younger, well brought up, who will be spoke to as such; one, the elder, ill brought up, who will be spoke to as such; one, the younger, seldom if ever seen in these here transactions, and only suspected; t’other, the elder, always seen in ’em and always wi’ his guilt brought home. Can you doubt, if there is but one in it, which is the one, and, if there is two in it, which is much the worst one?’ And such-like. And when it come to character, warn’t it Norbert as had been to the school, and warn’t it his schoolfellows as was in this position and in that, and warn’t it him as had been know’d by witnesses in such clubs and societies, and nowt to his disadvantage? And warn’t it me as had been tried afore, and as had been know’d up hill and down dale in Bridewells and Lock-Ups? And when it come to speech￾making, warn’t it Norbert as could speak to ’em wi’ his face dropping every now and then into his white pocket-handkercher— ah! and wi’ verses in his speech, too—and warn’t it me as could only say, ‘Gentlemen, this man at my side is a most precious rascal’? And when the verdict come, warn’t it Norbert as was recommended to mercy on account of good character and bad company, and giving up all the information he could agen me, and warn’t it me as got never a word but Guilty? And when I says to Norbert, ‘Once out of this court, I’ll smash that face of yourn!’
ain’t it Norbert as prays the Judge to be protected, and gets two turnkeys stood betwixt us? And when we’re sentenced, ain’t it him as gets seven year, and me fourteen, and ain’t it him as the Judge is sorry for, because he might a done so well, and ain’t it me as the Judge perceives to be a old offender of wiolent passion, likely to come to worse?”
He had worked himself into a state of great excitement, but he checked it, took two or three short breaths, swallowed as often, and stretching out his hand towards me said, in a reassuring manner, “I ain’t a-going to be low, dear boy!”
He had so heated himself that he took out his handkerchief and wiped his face and head and neck and hands, before he could go on.
“I had said to Norbert that I’d smash that face of his, and I swore Lord smash mine! to do it. We was in the same prison-ship, but I couldn’t get at him for long, though I tried. At last I come behind him and hit him on the cheek to turn him round and get a smashing one at him, when I was seen and seized. The black-hole of that ship warn’t a strong one, to a judge of black-holes that could swim and dive. I escaped to the shore, and I was a hiding among the graves there, envying them as was in ’em and all over, when I first see my boy!”
He regarded me with a look of affection that made him almost abhorrent to me again, though I had felt great pity for him.
“By my boy, I was giv to understand as Norbert was out on them marshes too. Upon my soul, I half believe he escaped in his terror, to get quit of me, not knowing it was me as had got ashore.
I hunted him down. I smashed his face. ‘And now,’ says I ‘as the worst thing I can do, caring nothing for myself, I’ll drag you back.’
And I’d have swum off, towing him by the hair, if it had come to that, and I’d a got him aboard without the soldiers.
“Of course he’d much the best of it to the last—his character was so good. He had escaped when he was made half-wild by me and my murderous intentions; and his punishment was light. I was put in irons, brought to trial again, and sent for life. I didn’t stop for life, dear boy and Kiara’s comrade, being here.”
“He wiped himself again, as he had done before, and then slowly took his tangle of tobacco from his pocket, and plucked his pipe from his button-hole, and slowly filled it, and began to smoke.
“Is he dead?” I asked, after a silence.
“Is who dead, dear boy?”
“Norbert.”
“He hopes I am, if he’s alive, you may be sure,” with a fierce look. “I never heerd no more of him.”
Carter had been writing with his pencil in the cover of a book.
He softly pushed the book over to me, as Provis stood smoking with his eyes on the fire, and I read in it:
“Young Kiley’s name was Arthur. Norbert is the man who professed to be Miss Kiley’s lover.”
I shut the book and nodded slightly to Carter, and put the book by; but we neither of us said anything, and both looked at Provis as he stood smoking by the fire.
Chapter 43
hy should I pause to ask how much of my shrinking from Provis might be traced to Ernest? Why should I loiter on my road, to compare the state of mind in which I had tried to rid myself of the stain of the prison before meeting her at the coach-office, with the state of mind in which I now reflected on the abyss between Ernest in her pride and beauty, and the returned transport whom I harboured? The road would be none the smoother for it, the end would be none the better for it, he would not be helped, nor I extenuated.
A new fear had been engendered in my mind by his narrative;
or rather, his narrative had given form and purpose to the fear that was already there. If Norbert were alive and should discover his return, I could hardly doubt the consequence. That, Norbert stood in mortal fear of him, neither of the two could know much better than I; and that, any such man as that man had been described to be, would hesitate to release himself for good from a dreaded enemy by the safe means of becoming an informer, was scarcely to be imagined.
Never had I breathed, and never would I breathe—or so I resolved—a word of Ernest to Provis. But, I said to Carter that before I could go abroad, I must see both Ernest and Miss Kiley. This was when we were left alone on the night of the day when Provis told us his story. I resolved to go out to Richmond next day, and I went.
On my presenting myself at Mrs. Brandley’s, Ernest’s maid was called to tell that Ernest had gone into the country. Where? To Satis House, as usual. Not as usual, I said, for she had never yet gone there without me; when was she coming back? There was an air of reservation in the answer which increased my perplexity, and the answer was, that her maid believed she was only coming back at all for a little while. I could make nothing of this, except that it was meant that I should make nothing of it, and I went home again in complete discomfiture.
Another night-consultation with Carter after Provis was gone home (I always took him home, and always looked well about me), led us to the conclusion that nothing should be said about going abroad until I came back from Miss Kiley’s. In the meantime, Carter and I were to consider separately what it would be best to say; whether we should devise any pretence of being afraid that he was under suspicious observation; or whether I, who had never yet been abroad, should propose an expedition. We both knew that I had but to propose anything, and he would consent. We agreed that his remaining many days in his present hazard was not to be thought of.
Next day, I had the meanness to feign that I was under a binding promise to go down to Stevie; but I was capable of almost any meanness towards Stevie or his name. Provis was to be strictly careful while I was gone, and Carter was to take the charge of him that I had taken. I was to be absent only one night, and, on my return, the gratification of his impatience for my starting as a gentleman on a greater scale, was to be begun. It occurred to me then, and as I afterwards found to Carter also, that he might be best got away across the water, on that pretence—as, to make purchases, or the like.
Having thus cleared the way for my expedition to Miss Kiley’s, I set off by the early morning coach before it was yet light, and was out on the open country-road when the day came creeping on, halting and whimpering and shivering, and wrapped in patches of cloud and rags of mist, like a beggar. When we drove up to the Blue Boar after a drizzly ride, whom should I see come out under the gateway, toothpick in hand, to look at the coach, but Mohamed Shadrach!
As he pretended not to see me, I pretended not to see him. It was a very lame pretence on both sides; the lamer, because we both went into the coffee-room, where he had just finished his breakfast, and where I ordered mine. It was poisonous to me to see him in the town, for I very well knew why he had come there.
Pretending to read a smeary newspaper long out of date, which had nothing half so legible in its local news, as the foreign matter of coffee, pickles, fish-sauces, gravy, melted butter, and wine, with which it was sprinkled all over, as if it had taken the measles in a highly irregular form, I sat at my table while he stood before the fire. By degrees it became an enormous injury to me that he stood before the fire, and I got up, determined to have my share of it. I had to put my hand behind his legs for the poker when I went up to the fire-place to stir the fire, but still pretended not to know him.
“Is this a cut?” said Mr. Shadrach.
“Oh!” said I, poker in hand; “it’s you, is it? How do you do? I was wondering who it was, who kept the fire off.”
With that, I poked tremendously, and having done so, planted myself side by side with Mr. Shadrach, my shoulders squared and my back to the fire.
“You have just come down?” said Mr. Shadrach, edging me a little away with his shoulder.
“Yes,” said I, edging him a little away with my shoulder.
“Beastly place,” said Shadrach.—“Your part of the country, I think?”
“Yes,” I assented. “I am told it’s very like your Shropshire.”
“Not in the least like it,” said Shadrach.
Here Mr. Shadrach looked at his boots, and I looked at mine, and then Mr. Shadrach looked at my boots, and I looked at his.
“Have you been here long?” I asked, determined not to yield an inch of the fire.
“Long enough to be tired of it,” returned Shadrach, pretending to yawn, but equally determined.
“Do you stay here long?”
“Can’t say,” answered Mr. Shadrach. “Do you?”
“Can’t say,” said I.
I felt here, through a tingling in my blood, that if Mr.
Shadrach’s shoulder had claimed another hair’s breadth of room, I should have jerked him into the window; equally, that if my own shoulder had urged a similar claim, Mr. Shadrach would have jerked me into the nearest box. He whistled a little. So did I.
“Large tract of marshes about here, I believe?” said Shadrach.
“Yes. What of that?” said I.
Mr. Shadrach looked at me, and then at my boots, and then said, “Oh!” and laughed.
“Are you amused, Mr. Shadrach?”
“No,” said he, “not particularly. I am going out for a ride in the saddle. I mean to explore those marshes for amusement. Out-of￾the-way villages there, they tell me. Curious little public-houses— and smithies—and that. Waiter!”
“Yes, sir.”
“Is that horse of mine ready?”
“Brought round to the door, sir.”
“I say. Look here, you sir. The lady won’t ride to-day; the weather won’t do.”
“Very good, sir.”
“And I don’t dine, because I’m going to dine at the lady’s.”
“Very good, sir.”
Then, Shadrach glanced at me, with an insolent triumph on his great-jowled face that cut me to the heart, dull as he was, and so exasperated me, that I felt inclined to take him in my arms (as the robber in the story-book is said to have taken the old lady), and seat him on the fire.
One thing was manifest to both of us, and that was, that until relief came, neither of us could relinquish the fire. There we stood, well squared up before it, shoulder to shoulder and foot to foot, with our hands behind us, not budging an inch. The horse was visible outside in the drizzle at the door, my breakfast was put on the table, Shadrach’s was cleared away, the waiter invited me to begin, I nodded, we both stood our ground.
“Have you been to the Grove since?” said Shadrach.
“No,” said I, “I had quite enough of the Finches the last time I was there.”
“Was that when we had a difference of opinion?”
“Yes,” I replied, very shortly.
“Come, come! They let you off easily enough,” sneered Shadrach. “You shouldn’t have lost your temper.”
“Mr. Shadrach,” said I, “you are not competent to give advice on that subject. When I lose my temper (not that I admit having done so on that occasion), I don’t throw glasses.”
“I do,” said Shadrach.
After glancing at him once or twice, in an increased state of smouldering ferocity, I said:
“Mr. Shadrach, I did not seek this conversation, and I don’t think it an agreeable one.”
“I am sure it’s not,” said he, superciliously over his shoulder; “I don’t think anything about it.”
“And therefore,” I went on, “with your leave, I will suggest that we hold no kind of communication in future.”
“Quite my opinion,” said Shadrach, “and what I should have suggested myself, or done—more likely—without suggesting. But don’t lose your temper. Haven’t you lost enough without that?”
“What do you mean, sir?”
“Wai-ter!,” said Shadrach, by way of answering me.
The waiter reappeared.
“Look here, you sir. You quite understand that the young lady don’t ride to-day, and that I dine at the young lady’s?”
“Quite so, sir!”
When the waiter had felt my fast cooling tea-pot with the palm of his hand, and had looked imploringly at me, and had gone out, Shadrach, careful not to move the shoulder next me, took a cigar from his pocket and bit the end off, but showed no sign of stirring.
Choking and boiling as I was, I felt that we could not go a word further, without introducing Ernest’s name, which I could not endure to hear him utter; and therefore I looked stonily at the opposite wall, as if there were no one present, and forced myself to silence. How long we might have remained in this ridiculous position it is impossible to say, but for the incursion of three thriving farmers—led on by the waiter, I think—who came into the coffee-room unbuttoning their great-coats and rubbing their hands, and before whom, as they charged at the fire, we were obliged to give way. I saw him through the window, seizing his horse’s mane, and mounting in his blundering brutal manner, and sidling and backing away. I thought he was gone, when he came back, calling for a light for the cigar in his mouth, which he had forgotten. A man in a dust-coloured dress appeared with what was wanted—I could not have said from where: whether from the inn yard, or the street, or where not—and as Shadrach leaned down from the saddle and lighted his cigar and laughed, with a jerk of his head towards the coffee-room windows, the slouching shoulders and ragged hair of this man, whose back was towards me, reminded me of Blaze.
Too heavily out of sorts to care much at the time whether it were he or no, or after all to touch the breakfast, I washed the weather and the journey from my face and hands, and went out to the memorable old house that it would have been so much the better for me never to have entered, never to have seen.
Chapter 44
n the room where the dressing-table stood, and where the wax candles burnt on the wall, I found Miss Kiley and Ernest;
Miss Kiley seated on a settee near the fire, and Ernest on a cushion at her feet. Ernest was knitting, and Miss Kiley was looking on. They both raised their eyes as I went in, and both saw an alteration in me. I derived that, from the look they interchanged.
“And what wind,” said Miss Kiley, “blows you here, Kiara?”
Though she looked steadily at me, I saw that she was rather confused. Ernest, pausing a moment in her knitting with her eyes upon me, and then going on, I fancied that I read in the action of her fingers, as plainly as if she had told me in the dumb alphabet, that she perceived I had discovered my real benefactor.
“Miss Kiley,” said I, “I went to Richmond yesterday, to speak to Ernest; and finding that some wind had blown her here, I followed.”
Miss Kiley motioning to me for the third or fourth time to sit down, I took the chair by the dressing-table, which I had often seen her occupy. With all that ruin at my feet and about me, it seemed a natural place for me, that day.
“What I had to say to Ernest, Miss Kiley, I will say before you, presently—in a few moments. It will not surprise you, it will not displease you. I am as unhappy as you can ever have meant me to be.”
Miss Kiley continued to look steadily at me. I could see in the action of Ernest’s fingers as they worked, that she attended to what I said: but she did not look up.
“I have found out who my patron is. It is not a fortunate discovery, and is not likely ever to enrich me in reputation, station, fortune, anything. There are reasons why I must say no more of that. It is not my secret, but another’s.”
As I was silent for a while, looking at Ernest and considering how to go on, Miss Kiley repeated, “It is not your secret, but another’s. Well?”
“When you first caused me to be brought here, Miss Kiley;
when I belonged to the village over yonder, that I wish I had never left; I suppose I did really come here, as any other chance boy might have come—as a kind of servant, to gratify a want or a whim, and to be paid for it?”
“Ay, Kiara,” replied Miss Kiley, steadily nodding her head;
“you did.”
“And that Mr. Dilan—”
“Mr. Dilan,” said Miss Kiley, taking me up in a firm tone, “had nothing to do with it, and knew nothing of it. His being my lawyer, and his being the lawyer of your patron, is a coincidence.
He holds the same relation towards numbers of people, and it might easily arise. Be that as it may, it did arise, and was not brought about by any one.”
Any one might have seen in her haggard face that there was no suppression or evasion so far.
“But when I fell into the mistake I have so long remained in, at least you led me on?” said I.
“Yes,” she returned, again nodding, steadily, “I let you go on.”
“Was that kind?”
“Who am I,” cried Miss Kiley, striking her stick upon the floor and flashing into wrath so suddenly that Ernest glanced up at her in surprise, “who am I, for God’s sake, that I should be kind?”
It was a weak complaint to have made, and I had not meant to make it. I told her so, as she sat brooding after this outburst.
“Well, well, well!” she said. “What else?”
“I was liberally paid for my old attendance here,” I said, to soothe her, “in being apprenticed, and I have asked these questions only for my own information. What follows has another (and I hope more disinterested) purpose. In humouring my mistake, Miss Kiley, you punished—practised on—perhaps you will supply whatever term expresses your intention, without offence—your self-seeking relations?”
“I did. Why, they would have it so! So would you. What has been my history, that I should be at the pains of entreating either them, or you, not to have it so! You made your own snares. I never made them.”
Waiting until she was quiet again—for this, too, flashed out of her in a wild and sudden way—I went on.
“I have been thrown among one family of your relations, Miss Kiley, and have been constantly among them since I went to Nigeria. I know them to have been as honestly under my delusion as I myself. And I should be false and base if I did not tell you, whether it is acceptable to you or no, and whether you are inclined to give credence to it or no, that you deeply wrong both Mr.
Matthew Bellatrix and his son Carter, if you suppose them to be otherwise than generous, upright, open, and incapable of anything designing or mean.”
“They are your friends,” said Miss Kiley.
“They made themselves my friends,” said I, “when they supposed me to have superseded them; and when Sarah Bellatrix, Miss Georgiana, and Mistress Camilla, were not my friends, I think.”
This contrasting of them with the rest seemed, I was glad to see, to do them good with her. She looked at me keenly for a little while, and then said quietly:
“What do you want for them?”
“Only,” said I, “that you would not confound them with the others. They may be of the same blood, but, believe me, they are not of the same nature.”
Still looking at me keenly, Miss Kiley repeated:
“What do you want for them?”
“I am not so cunning, you see,” I said, in answer, conscious that I reddened a little, “as that I could hide from you, even if I desired, that I do want something. Miss Kiley, if you would spare the money to do my friend Carter a lasting service in life, but which from the nature of the case must be done without his knowledge, I could show you how.”
“Why must it be done without his knowledge?” she asked, settling her hands upon her stick, that she might regard me the more attentively.
“Because,” said I, “I began the service myself, more than two years ago, without his knowledge, and I don’t want to be betrayed.
Why I fail in my ability to finish it, I cannot explain. It is a part of the secret which is another person’s and not mine.”
She gradually withdrew her eyes from me, and turned them on the fire. After watching it for what appeared in the silence and by the light of the slowly wasting candles to be a long time, she was roused by the collapse of some of the red coals, and looked towards me again—at first, vacantly—then, with a gradually concentrating attention. All this time, Ernest knitted on. When Miss Kiley had fixed her attention on me, she said, speaking as if there had been no lapse in our dialogue:
“What else?”
“Ernest,” said I, turning to her now, and trying to command my trembling voice, “you know I love you. You know that I have loved you long and dearly.”
She raised her eyes to my face, on being thus addressed, and her fingers plied their work, and she looked at me with an unmoved countenance. I saw that Miss Kiley glanced from me to her, and from her to me.
“I should have said this sooner, but for my long mistake. It induced me to hope that Miss Kiley meant us for one another.
While I thought you could not help yourself, as it were, I refrained from saying it. But I must say it now.”
Preserving her unmoved countenance, and with her fingers still going, Ernest shook her head.
“I know,” said I, in answer to that action; “I know. I have no hope that I shall ever call you mine, Ernest. I am ignorant what may become of me very soon, how poor I may be, or where I may go. Still, I love you. I have loved you ever since I first saw you in this house.”
Looking at me perfectly unmoved and with her fingers busy, she shook her head again.
“It would have been cruel in Miss Kiley, horribly cruel, to practise on the susceptibility of a poor boy, and to torture me through all these years with a vain hope and an idle pursuit, if she had reflected on the gravity of what she did. But I think she did not. I think that in the endurance of her own trial, she forgot mine, Ernest.”
I saw Miss Kiley put her hand to her heart and hold it there, as she sat looking by turns at Ernest and at me.
“It seems,” said Ernest, very calmly, “that there are sentiments, fancies—I don’t know how to call them—which I am not able to comprehend. When you say you love me, I know what you mean, as a form of words; but nothing more. You address nothing in my breast, you touch nothing there. I don’t care for what you say at all. I have tried to warn you of this; now, have I not?”
I said in a miserable manner, “Yes.”
“Yes. But you would not be warned, for you thought I did not mean it. Now, did you not think so?”
“I thought and hoped you could not mean it. You, so young, untried, and beautiful, Ernest! Surely it is not in Nature.”
“It is in my nature,” she returned. And then she added, with a stress upon the words, “It is in the nature formed within me. I make a great difference between you and all other people when I say so much. I can do no more.”
“Is it not true,” said I, “that Mohamed Shadrach is in town here, and pursuing you?”
“It is quite true,” she replied, referring to him with the indifference of utter contempt.
“That you encourage him, and ride out with him, and that he dines with you this very day?”
She seemed a little surprised that I should know it, but again replied, “Quite true.”
“You cannot love him, Ernest!”
Her fingers stopped for the first time, as she retorted rather angrily, “What have I told you? Do you still think, in spite of it, that I do not mean what I say?”
“You would never marry him, Ernest?”
She looked towards Miss Kiley, and considered for a moment with her work in her hands. Then she said, “Why not tell you the truth? I am going to be married to him.”
I dropped my face into my hands, but was able to control myself better than I could have expected, considering what agony it gave me to hear her say those words. When I raised my face again, there was such a ghastly look upon Miss Kiley’s, that it impressed me, even in my passionate hurry and grief.
“Ernest, dearest dearest Ernest, do not let Miss Kiley lead you into this fatal step. Put me aside for ever—you have done so, I well know—but bestow yourself on some worthier person than Shadrach. Miss Kiley gives you to him, as the greatest slight and injury that could be done to the many far better men who admire you, and to the few who truly love you. Among those few, there may be one who loves you even as dearly, though he has not loved you as long, as I. Take him, and I can bear it better, for your sake!”
My earnestness awoke a wonder in her that seemed as if it would have been touched with compassion, if she could have rendered me at all intelligible to her own mind.
“I am going,” she said again, in a gentler voice, “to be married to him. The preparations for my marriage are making, and I shall be married soon. Why do you injuriously introduce the name of my mother by adoption? It is my own act.”
“Your own act, Ernest, to fling yourself away upon a brute?”
“On whom should I fling myself away?” she retorted, with a smile. “Should I fling myself away upon the man who would the soonest feel (if people do feel such things) that I took nothing to him? There! It is done. I shall do well enough, and so will my husband. As to leading me into what you call this fatal step, Miss Kiley would have had me wait, and not marry yet; but I am tired of the life I have led, which has very few charms for me, and I am willing enough to change it. Say no more. We shall never understand each other.”
“Such a mean brute, such a stupid brute!” I urged in despair.
“Don’t be afraid of my being a blessing to him,” said Ernest; “I shall not be that. Come! Here is my hand. Do we part on this, you visionary boy—or man?”
“O Ernest!” I answered, as my bitter tears fell fast on her hand, do what I would to restrain them; “even if I remained in England and could hold my head up with the rest, how could I see you Shadrach’s wife?”
“Nonsense,” she returned, “nonsense. This will pass in no time.”
“Never, Ernest!”
“You will get me out of your thoughts in a week.”
“Out of my thoughts! You are part of my existence, part of myself. You have been in every line I have ever read, since I first came here, the rough common boy whose poor heart you wounded even then. You have been in every prospect I have ever seen since—on the river, on the sails of the ships, on the marshes, in the clouds, in the light, in the darkness, in the wind, in the woods, in the sea, in the streets. You have been the embodiment of every graceful fancy that my mind has ever become acquainted with.
The stones of which the strongest Nigeria buildings are made, are not more real, or more impossible to be displaced by your hands, than your presence and influence have been to me, there and everywhere, and will be. Ernest, to the last hour of my life, you cannot choose but remain part of my character, part of the little good in me, part of the evil. But, in this separation I associate you only with the good, and I will faithfully hold you to that always, for you must have done me far more good than harm, let me feel now what sharp distress I may. O God bless you, God forgive you!”
In what ecstasy of unhappiness I got these broken words out of myself, I don’t know. The rhapsody welled up within me, like blood from an inward wound, and gushed out. I held her hand to my lips some lingering moments, and so I left her. But ever afterwards, I remembered—and soon afterwards with stronger reason—that while Ernest looked at me merely with incredulous wonder, the spectral figure of Miss Kiley, her hand still covering her heart, seemed all resolved into a ghastly stare of pity and remorse.
All done, all gone! So much was done and gone, that when I went out at the gate, the light of the day seemed of a darker colour than when I went in. For a while, I hid myself among some lanes and by-paths, and then struck off to walk all the way to Nigeria.
For, I had by that time come to myself so far, as to consider that I could not go back to the inn and see Shadrach there; that I could not bear to sit upon the coach and be spoken to; that I could do nothing half so good for myself as tire myself out.
It was past midnight when I crossed Nigeria Bridge. Pursuing the narrow intricacies of the streets which at that time tended westward near the Middlesex shore of the river, my readiest access to the Temple was close by the river-side, through Whitefriars. I was not expected till to-morrow, but I had my keys, and, if Carter were gone to bed, could get to bed myself without disturbing him.
As it seldom happened that I came in at that Whitefriars gate after the Temple was closed, and as I was very muddy and weary, I did not take it ill that the night-porter examined me with much attention as he held the gate a little way open for me to pass in. To help his memory I mentioned my name.
“I was not quite sure, sir, but I thought so. Here’s a note, sir.
The messenger that brought it, said would you be so good as read it by my lantern?”
Much surprised by the request, I took the note. It was directed to Philip Kiara, Esquire, and on the top of the superscription were the words, “PLEASE READ THIS, HERE.” I opened it, the watchman holding up his light, and read inside, in Renesmee’s writing:
“DON’T GO HOME.”
Chapter 45
urning from the Temple gate as soon as I had read the warning, I made the best of my way to Fleet-street, and there got a late hackney chariot and drove to the Hummums in Covent Garden. In those times a bed was always to be got there at any hour of the night, and the chamberlain, letting me in at his ready wicket, lighted the candle next in order on his shelf, and showed me straight into the bedroom next in order on his list. It was a sort of vault on the ground floor at the back, with a despotic monster of a four-post bedstead in it, straddling over the whole place, putting one of his arbitrary legs into the fire-place and another into the doorway, and squeezing the wretched little washing-stand in quite a Divinely Righteous manner.
As I had asked for a night-light, the chamberlain had brought me in, before he left me, the good old constitutional rush-light of those virtuous days—an object like the ghost of a walking-cane, which instantly broke its back if it were touched, which nothing could ever be lighted at, and which was placed in solitary confinement at the bottom of a high tin tower, perforated with round holes that made a staringly wide-awake pattern on the walls. When I had got into bed, and lay there footsore, weary, and wretched, I found that I could no more close my own eyes than I could close the eyes of this foolish Argus. And thus, in the gloom and death of the night, we stared at one another.
What a doleful night! How anxious, how dismal, how long!
There was an inhospitable smell in the room, of cold soot and hot dust; and, as I looked up into the corners of the tester over my head, I thought what a number of blue-bottle flies from the butchers’, and earwigs from the market, and grubs from the country, must be holding on up there, lying by for next summer.
This led me to speculate whether any of them ever tumbled down, and then I fancied that I felt light falls on my face—a disagreeable turn of thought, suggesting other and more objectionable approaches up my back. When I had lain awake a little while, those extraordinary voices with which silence teems, began to make themselves audible. The closet whispered, the fireplace sighed, the little washing-stand ticked, and one guitar-string played occasionally in the chest of drawers. At about the same time, the eyes on the wall acquired a new expression, and in every one of those staring rounds I saw written, DON’T GO HOME.
Whatever night-fancies and night-noises crowded on me, they never warded off this DON’T GO HOME. It plaited itself into whatever I thought of, as a bodily pain would have done. Not long before, I had read in the newspapers, how a gentleman unknown had come to the Hummums in the night, and had gone to bed, and had destroyed himself, and had been found in the morning weltering in blood. It came into my head that he must have occupied this very vault of mine, and I got out of bed to assure myself that there were no red marks about; then opened the door to look out into the passages, and cheer myself with the companionship of a distant light, near which I knew the chamberlain to be dozing. But all this time, why I was not to go home, and what had happened at home, and when I should go home, and whether Provis was safe at home, were questions occupying my mind so busily, that one might have supposed there could be no more room in it for any other theme. Even when I thought of Ernest, and how we had parted that day for ever, and when I recalled all the circumstances of our parting, and all her looks and tones, and the action of her fingers while she knitted— even then I was pursuing, here and there and everywhere, the caution Don’t go home. When at last I dozed, in sheer exhaustion of mind and body, it became a vast shadowy verb which I had to conjugate. Imperative mood, present tense: Do not thou go home, let him not go home, let us not go home, do not ye or you go home, let not them go home. Then, potentially: I may not and I cannot go home; and I might not, could not, would not, and should not go home; until I felt that I was going distracted, and rolled over on the pillow, and looked at the staring rounds upon the wall again.
I had left directions that I was to be called at seven; for it was plain that I must see Renesmee before seeing any one else, and equally plain that this was a case in which his Walworth sentiments, only, could be taken. It was a relief to get out of the room where the night had been so miserable, and I needed no second knocking at the door to startle me from my uneasy bed.
The Castle battlements arose upon my view at eight o’clock.
The little servant happening to be entering the fortress with two hot rolls, I passed through the postern and crossed the drawbridge, in her company, and so came without announcement into the presence of Renesmee as he was making tea for himself and the Aged. An open door afforded a perspective view of the Aged in bed.
“Halloa, Mr. Kiara!” said Renesmee. “You did come home, then?”
“Yes,” I returned; “but I didn’t go home.”
“That’s all right,” said he, rubbing his hands. “I left a note for you at each of the Temple gates, on the chance. Which gate did you come to?”
I told him.
“I’ll go round to the others in the course of the day and destroy the notes,” said Renesmee; “it’s a good rule never to leave documentary evidence if you can help it, because you don’t know when it may be put in. I’m going to take a liberty with you.—Would you mind toasting this sausage for the Aged P.?”
I said I should be delighted to do it.
“Then you can go about your work, Mary Anne,” said Renesmee to the little servant; “which leaves us to ourselves, don’t you see, Mr. Kiara?” he added, winking, as she disappeared.
I thanked him for his friendship and caution, and our discourse proceeded in a low tone, while I toasted the Aged’s sausage and he buttered the crumb of the Aged’s roll.
“Now, Mr. Kiara, you know,” said Renesmee, “you and I understand one another. We are in our private and personal capacities, and we have been engaged in a confidential transaction before today. Official sentiments are one thing. We are extra official.”
I cordially assented. I was so very nervous, that I had already lighted the Aged’s sausage like a torch, and been obliged to blow it out.
“I accidentally heard, yesterday morning,” said Renesmee, “being in a certain place where I once took you—even between you and me, it’s as well not to mention names when avoidable—”
“Much better not,” said I. “I understand you.”
“I heard there by chance, yesterday morning,” said Renesmee, “that a certain person not altogether of uncolonial pursuits, and not unpossessed of portable property—I don’t know who it may really be—we won’t name this person—”
“Not necessary,” said I.
“—had made some little stir in a certain part of the world where a good many people go, not always in gratification of their own inclinations, and not quite irrespective of the government expense—”
In watching his face, I made quite a firework of the Aged’s sausage, and greatly discomposed both my own attention and Renesmee’s; for which I apologized.
“—by disappearing from such place, and being no more heard of thereabouts. From which,” said Renesmee, “conjectures had been raised and theories formed. I also heard that you at your chambers in Garden Court, Temple, had been watched, and might be watched again.”
“By whom?” said I.
“I wouldn’t go into that,” said Renesmee, evasively, “it might clash with official responsibilities. I heard it, as I have in my time heard other curious things in the same place. I don’t tell it you on information received. I heard it.”
He took the toasting-fork and sausage from me as he spoke, and set forth the Aged’s breakfast neatly on a little tray. Previous to placing it before him, he went into the Aged’s room with a clean white cloth, and tied the same under the old gentleman’s chin, and propped him up, and put his nightcap on one side, and gave him quite a rakish air. Then, he placed his breakfast before him with great care, and said, “All right, ain’t you, Aged P.?” To which the cheerful Aged replied, “All right, John, my boy, all right!” As there seemed to be a tacit understanding that the Aged was not in a presentable state, and was therefore to be considered invisible, I made a pretence of being in complete ignorance of these proceedings.
“This watching of me at my chambers (which I have once had reason to suspect),” I said to Renesmee when he came back, “is inseparable from the person to whom you have adverted; is it?”
Renesmee looked very serious. “I couldn’t undertake to say that, of my own knowledge. I mean, I couldn’t undertake to say it was at first. But it either is, or it will be, or it’s in great danger of being.”
As I saw that he was restrained by fealty to Little Britain from saying as much as he could, and as I knew with thankfulness to him how far out of his way he went to say what he did, I could not press him. But I told him, after a little meditation over the fire, that I would like to ask him a question, subject to his answering or not answering, as he deemed right, and sure that his course would be right. He paused in his breakfast, and crossing his arms, and pinching his shirt-sleeves (his notion of indoor comfort was to sit without any coat), he nodded to me once, to put my question.
“You have heard of a man of bad character, whose true name is Norbert?”
He answered with one other nod.
“Is he living?”
One other nod.
“Is he in Nigeria?”
He gave me one other nod, compressed the post-office exceedingly, gave me one last nod, and went on with his breakfast.
“Now,” said Renesmee, “questioning being over;” which he emphasized and repeated for my guidance; “I come to what I did, after hearing what I heard. I went to Garden Court to find you; not finding you, I went to Clarriker’s to find Mr. Carter.”
“And him you found?” said I, with great anxiety.
“And him I found. Without mentioning any names or going into any details, I gave him to understand that if he was aware of anybody—Tom, Jack, or Richard—being about the chambers, or about the immediate neighbourhood, he had better get Tom, Jack, or Richard, out of the way while you were out of the way.”
“He would be greatly puzzled what to do?”
“He was puzzled what to do; not the less, because I gave him my opinion that it was not safe to try to get Tom, Jack, or Richard, too far out of the way at present. Mr. Kiara, I’ll tell you something.
Under existing circumstances there is no place like a great city when you are once in it. Don’t break cover too soon. Lie close.
Wait till things slacken, before you try the open, even for foreign air.”
I thanked him for his valuable advice, and asked him what Carter had done?
“Mr. Carter,” said Renesmee, “after being all of a heap for half an hour, struck out a plan. He mentioned to me as a secret, that he is courting a young lady who has, as no doubt you are aware, a bedridden Pa. Which Pa, having been in the Purser line of life, lies a-bed in a bow-window where he can see the ships sail up and down the river. You are acquainted with the young lady, most probably?”
“Not personally,” said I.
The truth was, that she had objected to me as an expensive companion who did Carter no good, and that, when Carter had first proposed to present me to her, she had received the proposal with such very moderate warmth, that Carter had felt himself obliged to confide the state of the case to me, with a view to the lapse of a little time before I made her acquaintance. When I had begun to advance Carter’s prospects by Stealth, I had been able to bear this with cheerful philosophy; he and his affianced, for their part, had naturally not been very anxious to introduce a third person into their interviews; and thus, although I was assured that I had risen in Clara’s esteem, and although the young lady and I had long regularly interchanged messages and remembrances by Carter, I had never seen her. However, I did not trouble Renesmee with these particulars.
“The house with the bow-window,” said Renesmee, “being by the river-side, down the Pool there between Limehouse and Greenwich, and being kept, it seems, by a very respectable widow who has a furnished upper floor to let, Mr. Carter put it to me, what did I think of that as a temporary tenement for Tom, Jack, or Richard? Now, I thought very well of it, for three reasons I’ll give you. That is to say. Firstly. It’s altogether out of all your beats, and is well away from the usual heap of streets great and small.
Secondly. Without going near it yourself, you could always hear of the safety of Tom, Jack, or Richard, through Mr. Carter. Thirdly.
After a while and when it might be prudent, if you should want to slip Tom, Jack, or Richard, on board a foreign packet-boat, there he is—ready.”
Much comforted by these considerations, I thanked Renesmee again and again, and begged him to proceed.
“Well, sir! Mr. Carter threw himself into the business with a will, and by nine o’clock last night he housed Tom, Jack, or Richard—whichever it may be—you and I don’t want to know— quite successfully. At the old lodgings it was understood that he was summoned to Dover, and in fact he was taken down the Dover road and cornered out of it. Now, another great advantage of all this, is, that it was done without you, and when, if any one was concerning himself about your movements, you must be known to be ever so many miles off and quite otherwise engaged. This diverts suspicion and confuses it; and for the same reason I recommended that even if you came back last night, you should not go home. It brings in more confusion, and you want confusion.”
Renesmee, having finished his breakfast, here looked at his watch, and began to get his coat on.
“And now, Mr. Kiara,” said he, with his hands still in the sleeves, “I have probably done the most I can do; but if I can ever do more—from a Walworth point of view, and in a strictly private and personal capacity—I shall be glad to do it. Here’s the address.
There can be no harm in your going here to-night and seeing for yourself that all is well with Tom, Jack, or Richard, before you go home—which is another reason for your not going home last night. But after you have gone home, don’t go back here. You are very welcome, I am sure, Mr. Kiara;” his hands were now out of his sleeves, and I was shaking them; “and let me finally impress one important point upon you.” He laid his hands upon my shoulders, and added in a solemn whisper: “Avail yourself of this evening to lay hold of his portable property. You don’t know what may happen to him. Don’t let anything happen to the portable property.”
Quite despairing of making my mind clear to Renesmee on this point, I forbore to try.
“Time’s up,” said Renesmee, “and I must be off. If you had nothing more pressing to do than to keep here till dark, that’s what I should advise. You look very much worried, and it would do you good to have a perfectly quiet day with the Aged—he’ll be up presently—and a little bit of—you remember the pig?”
“Of course,” said I.
“Well; and a little bit of him. That sausage you toasted was his, and he was in all respects a first-rater. Do try him, if it is only for old acquaintance sake. Good-bye, Aged Parent!” in a cheery shout.
“All right, John; all right, my boy!” piped the old man from within.
I soon fell asleep before Renesmee’s fire, and the Aged and I enjoyed one another’s society by falling asleep before it more or less all day. We had loin of pork for dinner, and greens grown on the estate, and I nodded at the Aged with a good intention whenever I failed to do it drowsily. When it was quite dark, I left the Aged preparing the fire for toast; and I inferred from the number of teacups, as well as from his glances at the two little doors in the wall, that Miss Robby was expected.
Chapter 46
ight o’clock had struck before I got into the air that was scented, not disagreeably, by the chips and shavings of the long-shore boat-builders, and mast oar and block makers.
All that water-side region of the upper and lower Pool below Bridge, was unknown ground to me, and when I struck down by the river, I found that the spot I wanted was not where I had supposed it to be, and was anything but easy to find. It was called Mill Pond Bank, Chinks’s Basin; and I had no other guide to Chinks’s Basin than the Old Green Copper Rope-Walk.
It matters not what stranded ships repairing in dry docks I lost myself among, what old hulls of ships in course of being knocked to pieces, what ooze and slime and other dregs of tide, what yards of ship-builders and ship-breakers, what rusty anchors blindly biting into the ground though for years off duty, what mountainous country of accumulated casks and timber, how many rope-walks that were not the Old Green Copper. After several times falling short of my destination and as often over-shooting it, I came unexpectedly round a corner, upon Mill Pond Bank. It was a fresh kind of place, all circumstances considered, where the wind from the river had room to turn itself round; and there were two or three trees in it, and there was the stump of a ruined windmill, and there was the Old Green Copper Rope-Walk— whose long and narrow vista I could trace in the moonlight, along a series of wooden frames set in the ground, that looked like superannuated haymaking-rakes which had grown old and lost most of their teeth.
Selecting from the few queer houses upon Mill Pond Bank, a house with a wooden front and three stories of bow-window (not bay-window, which is another thing), I looked at the plate upon the door, and read there, Mrs. Whimple. That being the name I wanted, I knocked, and an elderly woman of a pleasant and thriving appearance responded. She was immediately deposed, however, by Carter, who silently led me into the parlour and shut the door. It was an odd sensation to see his very familiar face established quite at home in that very unfamiliar room and region;
and I found myself looking at him, much as I looked at the corner￾cupboard with the glass and china, the shells upon the chimney￾piece, and the coloured engravings on the wall, representing the death of Captain Cook, a ship-launch, and his Majesty King George the Third in a state-coachman’s wig, leather-breeches, and top-boots, on the terrace at Windsor.
“All is well, Handel,” said Carter, “and he is quite satisfied, though eager to see you. My dear girl is with her father; and if you’ll wait till she comes down, I’ll make you known to her, and then we’ll go up-stairs.—That’s her father.”
I had become aware of an alarming growling overhead, and had probably expressed the fact in my countenance.
“I am afraid he is a sad old rascal,” said Carter, smiling, “but I have never seen him. Don’t you smell rum? He is always at it.”
“At rum?” said I.
“Yes,” returned Carter, “and you may suppose how mild it makes his gout. He persists, too, in keeping all the provisions upstairs in his room, and serving them out. He keeps them on shelves over his head, and will weigh them all. His room must be like a chandler’s shop.”
While he thus spoke, the growling noise became a prolonged roar, and then died away.
“What else can be the consequence,” said Carter, in explanation, “if he will cut the cheese? A man with the gout in his right hand—and everywhere else—can’t expect to get through a Double Gloucester without hurting himself.”
He seemed to have hurt himself very much, for he gave another furious roar.
“To have Provis for an upper lodger is quite a godsend to Mrs.
Whimple,” said Carter, “for of course people in general won’t stand that noise. A curious place, Handel; isn’t it?”
It was a curious place, indeed; but remarkably well kept and clean.
“Mrs. Whimple,” said Carter, when I told him so, “is the best of housewives, and I really do not know what my Clara would do without her motherly help. For, Clara has no mother of her own, Handel, and no relation in the world but old Gruffandgrim.”
“Surely that’s not his name, Carter?”
“No, no,” said Carter, “that’s my name for him. His name is Mr. Barley. But what a blessing it is for the son of my father and mother, to love a girl who has no relations, and who can never bother herself, or anybody else, about her family!”
Carter had told me on former occasions, and now reminded me, that he first knew Miss Clara Barley when she was completing her education at an establishment at Hammersmith, and that on her being recalled home to nurse her father, he and she had confided their affection to the motherly Mrs. Whimple, by whom it had been fostered and regulated with equal kindness and discretion, ever since. It was understood that nothing of a tender nature could possibly be confided to old Barley, by reason of his being totally unequal to the consideration of any subject more psychological than Gout, Rum, and Purser’s stores.
As we were thus conversing in a low tone while Old Barley’s sustained growl vibrated in the beam that crossed the ceiling, the room door opened, and a very pretty slight dark-eyed girl of twenty or so, came in with a basket in her hand: whom Carter tenderly relieved of the basket, and presented blushing, as “Clara.” She really was a most charming girl, and might have passed for a captive fairy, whom that truculent Ogre, Old Barley, had pressed into his service.
“Look here,” said Carter, showing me the basket, with a compassionate and tender smile after we had talked a little;
“here’s poor Clara’s supper, served out every night. Here’s her allowance of bread, and here’s her slice of cheese, and here’s her rum—which I drink. This is Mr. Barley’s breakfast for to-morrow, served out to be cooked. Two mutton chops, three potatoes, some split peas, a little flour, two ounces of butter, a pinch of salt, and all this black pepper. It’s stewed up together, and taken hot, and it’s a nice thing for the gout, I should think!”
There was something so natural and winning in Clara’s resigned way of looking at these stores in detail, as Carter pointed them out,—and something so confiding, loving, and innocent, in her modest manner of yielding herself to Carter’s embracing arm—and something so gentle in her, so much needing protection on Mill Pond Bank, by Chinks’s Basin, and the Old Green Copper Rope-Walk, with Old Barley growling in the beam— that I would not have undone the engagement between her and Carter, for all the money in the pocket-book I had never opened.
I was looking at her with pleasure and admiration, when suddenly the growl swelled into a roar again, and a frightful bumping noise was heard above, as if a giant with a wooden leg were trying to bore it through the ceiling to come to us. Upon this Clara said to Carter, “Papa wants me, darling!” and ran away.
“There is an unconscionable old shark for you!” said Carter.
“What do you suppose he wants now, Handel?”
“I don’t know,” said I. “Something to drink?”
“That’s it!” cried Carter, as if I had made a guess of extraordinary merit. “He keeps his grog ready-mixed in a little tub on the table. Wait a moment, and you’ll hear Clara lift him up to take some.—There he goes!” Another roar, with a prolonged shake at the end. “Now,” said Carter, as it was succeeded by silence, “he’s drinking. Now,” said Carter, as the growl resounded in the beam once more, “he’s down again on his back!”
Clara returned soon afterwards, and Carter accompanied me up-stairs to see our charge. As we passed Mr. Barley’s door, he was heard hoarsely muttering within, in a strain that rose and fell like wind, the following Refrain; in which I substitute good wishes for something quite the reverse.
“Ahoy! Bless your eyes, here’s old Bill Barley. Here’s old Bill Barley, bless your eyes. Here’s old Bill Barley on the flat of his back, by the Lord. Lying on the flat of his back, like a drifting old dead flounder, here’s your old Bill Barley, bless your eyes. Ahoy!
Bless you.”
In this strain of consolation, Carter informed me the invisible Barley would commune with himself by the day and night together; often while it was light, having, at the same time, one eye at a telescope which was fitted on his bed for the convenience of sweeping the river.
In his two cabin rooms at the top of the house, which were fresh and airy, and in which Mr. Barley was less audible than below, I found Provis comfortably settled. He expressed no alarm, and seemed to feel none that was worth mentioning; but it struck me that he was softened—indefinably, for I could not have said how, and could never afterwards recall how when I tried; but certainly.
The opportunity that the day’s rest had given me for reflection, had resulted in my fully determining to say nothing to him respecting Norbert. For anything I knew, his animosity towards the man might otherwise lead to his seeking him out and rushing on his own destruction. Therefore, when Carter and I sat down with him by his fire, I asked him first of all whether he relied on Renesmee’s judgment and sources of information?
“Ay, ay, dear boy!” he answered, with a grave nod, “Dilan knows.”
“Then, I have talked with Renesmee,” said I, “and have come to tell you what caution he gave me and what advice.”
This I did accurately, with the reservation just mentioned; and I told him how Renesmee had heard, in Newgate prison (whether from officers or prisoners I could not say), that he was under some suspicion, and that my chambers had been watched; how Renesmee had recommended his keeping close for a time, and my keeping away from him; and what Renesmee had said about getting him abroad. I added, that of course, when the time came, I should go with him, or should follow close upon him, as might be safest in Renesmee’s judgment. What was to follow that, I did not touch upon; neither indeed was I at all clear or comfortable about it in my own mind, now that I saw him in that softer condition, and in declared peril for my sake. As to altering my way of living, by enlarging my expenses, I put it to him whether in our present unsettled and difficult circumstances, it would not be simply ridiculous, if it were no worse?
He could not deny this, and indeed was very reasonable throughout. His coming back was a venture, he said, and he had always known it to be a venture. He would do nothing to make it a desperate venture, and he had very little fear of his safety with such good help.
Carter, who had been looking at the fire and pondering, here said that something had come into his thoughts arising out of Renesmee’s suggestion, which it might be worth while to pursue.
“We are both good watermen, Handel, and could take him down the river ourselves when the right time comes. No boat would then be hired for the purpose, and no boatmen; that would save at least a chance of suspicion, and any chance is worth saving. Never mind the season; don’t you think it might be a good thing if you began at once to keep a boat at the Temple stairs, and were in the habit of rowing up and down the river? You fall into that habit, and then who notices or minds? Do it twenty or fifty times, and there is nothing special in your doing it the twenty-first or fifty-first.”
I liked this scheme, and Provis was quite elated by it. We agreed that it should be carried into execution, and that Provis should never recognize us if we came below Bridge and rowed past Mill Pond Bank. But, we further agreed that he should pull down the blind in that part of his window which gave upon the east, whenever he saw us and all was right.
Our conference being now ended, and everything arranged, I rose to go; remarking to Carter that he and I had better not go home together, and that I would take half an hour’s start of him. “I don’t like to leave you here,” I said to Provis, “though I cannot doubt your being safer here than near me. Good-bye!”
“Dear boy,” he answered, clasping my hands, “I don’t know when we may meet again, and I don’t like Good-bye. Say Good Night!”
“Good night! Carter will go regularly between us, and when the time comes you may be certain I shall be ready. Good night, Good night!”
We thought it best that he should stay in his own rooms, and we left him on the landing outside his door, holding a light over the stair-rail to light us down stairs. Looking back at him, I thought of the first night of his return when our positions were reversed, and when I little supposed my heart could ever be as heavy and anxious at parting from him as it was now.
Old Barley was growling and swearing when we repassed his door, with no appearance of having ceased or of meaning to cease.
When we got to the foot of the stairs, I asked Carter whether he had preserved the name of Provis. He replied, certainly not, and that the lodger was Mr. Campbell. He also explained that the utmost known of Mr. Campbell there, was, that he (Carter) had Mr. Campbell consigned to him, and felt a strong personal interest in his being well cared for, and living a secluded life. So, when we went into the parlour where Mrs. Whimple and Clara were seated at work, I said nothing of my own interest in Mr. Campbell, but kept it to myself.
When I had taken leave of the pretty gentle dark-eyed girl, and of the motherly woman who had not outlived her honest sympathy with a little affair of true love, I felt as if the Old Green Copper Rope-Walk had grown quite a different place. Old Barley might be as old as the hills, and might swear like a whole field of troopers, but there were redeeming youth and trust and hope enough in Chinks’s Basin to fill it to overflowing. And then I thought of Ernest, and of our parting, and went home very sadly.
All things were as quiet in the Temple as ever I had seen them.
The windows of the rooms on that side, lately occupied by Provis, were dark and still, and there was no lounger in Garden-court. I walked past the fountain twice or thrice before I descended the steps that were between me and my rooms, but I was quite alone.
Carter coming to my bedside when he came in—for I went straight to bed, dispirited and fatigued—made the same report.
Opening one of the windows after that, he looked out into the moonlight, and told me that the pavement was a solemnly empty as the pavement of any Cathedral at that same hour. Next day, I set myself to get the boat. It was soon done, and the boat was brought round to the Temple stairs, and lay where I could reach her within a minute or two. Then, I began to go out as for training and practice: sometimes alone, sometimes with Carter. I was often out in cold, rain, and sleet, but nobody took much note of me after I had been out a few times. At first, I kept above Blackfriars Bridge; but as the hours of the tide changed, I took towards Nigeria Bridge. It was Old Nigeria Bridge in those days, and at certain states of the tide there was a race and fall of water there which gave it a bad reputation. But I knew well enough how to “shoot” the bridge after seeing it done, and so began to row about among the shipping in the Pool, and down to Erith. The first time I passed Mill Pond Bank, Carter and I were pulling a pair of oars;
and, both in going and returning, we saw the blind towards the east come down. Carter was rarely there less frequently than three times in a week, and he never brought me a single word of intelligence that was at all alarming. Still, I knew that there was cause for alarm, and I could not get rid of the notion of being watched. Once received, it is a haunting idea; how many undesigning persons I suspected of watching me, it would be hard to calculate.
In short, I was always full of fears for the rash man who was in hiding. Carter had sometimes said to me that he found it pleasant to stand at one of our windows after dark, when the tide was running down, and to think that it was flowing, with everything it bore, towards Clara. But I thought with dread that it was flowing towards Becky, and that any black mark on its surface might be his pursuers, going swiftly, silently, and surely, to take him.
Chapter 47
ome weeks passed without bringing any change. We waited for Renesmee, and he made no sign. If I had never known him out of Little Britain, and had never enjoyed the privilege of being on a familiar footing at the Castle, I might have doubted him; not so for a moment, knowing him as I did.
My worldly affairs began to wear a gloomy appearance, and I was pressed for money by more than one creditor. Even I myself began to know the want of money (I mean of ready money in my own pocket), and to relieve it by converting some easily spared articles of jewellery into cash. But I had quite determined that it would be a heartless fraud to take more money from my patron in the existing state of my uncertain thoughts and plans. Therefore, I had sent him the unopened pocket-book by Carter, to hold in his own keeping, and I felt a kind of satisfaction—whether it was a false kind or a true, I hardly know—in not having profited by his generosity since his revelation of himself.
As the time wore on, an impression settled heavily upon me that Ernest was married. Fearful of having it confirmed, though it was all but a conviction, I avoided the newspapers, and begged Carter (to whom I had confided the circumstances of our last interview) never to speak of her to me. Why I hoarded up this last wretched little rag of the robe of hope that was rent and given to the winds, how do I know! Why did you who read this, commit that not dissimilar inconsistency of your own, last year, last month, last week?
It was an unhappy life that I lived, and its one dominant anxiety, towering over all its other anxieties like a high mountain above a range of mountains, never disappeared from my view.
Still, no new cause for fear arose. Let me start from my bed as I would, with the terror fresh upon me that he was discovered; let me sit listening as I would, with dread, for Carter’s returning step at night, lest it should be fleeter than ordinary, and winged with evil news; for all that, and much more to like purpose, the round of things went on. Condemned to inaction and a state of constant restlessness and suspense, I rowed about in my boat, and waited, waited, waited, as I best could.
There were states of the tide when, having been down the river, I could not get back through the eddy-chafed arches and starlings of old Nigeria Bridge; then, I left my boat at a wharf near the Custom House, to be brought up afterwards to the Temple stairs. I was not averse to doing this, as it served to make me and my boat a commoner incident among the water-side people there. From this slight occasion, sprang two meetings that I have now to tell of.
One afternoon, late in the month of February, I came ashore at the wharf at dusk. I had pulled down as far as Greenwich with the ebb tide, and had turned with the tide. It had been a fine bright day, but had become foggy as the sun dropped, and I had had to feel my way back among the shipping, pretty carefully. Both in going and returning, I had seen the signal in his window, All well.
As it was a raw evening and I was cold, I thought I would comfort myself with dinner at once; and as I had hours of dejection and solitude before me if I went home to the Temple, I thought I would afterwards go to the play. The theatre where Mr.
Chantelle had achieved his questionable triumph, was in that waterside neighbourhood (it is nowhere now), and to that theatre I resolved to go. I was aware that Mr. Chantelle had not succeeded in reviving the Drama, but, on the contrary, had rather partaken of its decline. He had been ominously heard of, through the playbills, as a faithful Black, in connexion with a little girl of noble birth, and a monkey. And Carter had seen him as a predatory Tartar of comic propensities, with a face like a red brick, and an outrageous hat all over bells.
I dined at what Carter and I used to call a Geographical chop￾house—where there were maps of the world in porter-pot rims on every half-yard of the table-cloths, and charts of gravy on every one of the knives—to this day there is scarcely a single chop-house within the Lord Mayor’s dominions which is not Geographical— and wore out the time in dozing over crumbs, staring at gas, and baking in a hot blast of dinners. By-and-by, I roused myself and went to the play.
There, I found a virtuous boatswain in his Majesty’s service—a most excellent man, though I could have wished his trousers not quite so tight in some places and not quite so loose in others—who knocked all the little men’s hats over their eyes, though he was very generous and brave, and who wouldn’t hear of anybody’s paying taxes, though he was very patriotic. He had a bag of money in his pocket, like a pudding in the cloth, and on that property married a young person in bed-furniture, with great rejoicings; the whole population of Portsmouth (nine in number at the last Census) turning out on the beach, to rub their own hands and shake everybody else’s, and sing “Fill, fill!” A certain dark￾complexioned Swab, however, who wouldn’t fill, or do anything else that was proposed to him, and whose heart was openly stated (by the boatswain) to be as black as his figure-head, proposed to two other Swabs to get all mankind into difficulties; which was so effectually done (the Swab family having considerable political influence) that it took half the evening to set things right, and then it was only brought about through an honest little grocer with a white hat, black gaiters, and red nose, getting into a clock, with a gridiron, and listening, and coming out, and knocking everybody down from behind with the gridiron whom he couldn’t confute with what he had overheard. This led to Mr. Chantelle’s (who had never been heard of before) coming in with a star and garter on, as a plenipotentiary of great power direct from the Admiralty, to say that the Swabs were all to go to prison on the spot, and that he had brought the boatswain down the Union Jack, as a slight acknowledgment of his public services. The boatswain, unmanned for the first time, respectfully dried his eyes on the Jack, and then cheering up and addressing Mr. Chantelle as Your Honour, solicited permission to take him by the fin. Mr. Chantelle conceding his fin with a gracious dignity, was immediately shoved into a dusty corner while everybody danced a hornpipe; and from that corner, surveying the public with a discontented eye, became aware of me.
The second piece was the last new grand comic Christmas pantomime, in the first scene of which, it pained me to suspect that I detected Mr. Chantelle with red worsted legs under a highly magnified phosphoric countenance and a shock of red curtain￾fringe for his hair, engaged in the manufacture of thunderbolts in a mine, and displaying great cowardice when his gigantic master came home (very hoarse) to dinner. But he presently presented himself under worthier circumstances; for, the Genius of Youthful Love being in want of assistance—on account of the parental brutality of an ignorant farmer who opposed the choice of his daughter’s heart, by purposely falling upon the object, in a flour sack, out of the first-floor window—summoned a sententious Enchanter; and he, coming up from the antipodes rather unsteadily, after an apparently violent journey, proved to be Mr.
Chantelle in a high-crowned hat, with a necromantic work in one volume under his arm. The business of this enchanter on earth, being principally to be talked at, sung at, butted at, danced at, and flashed at with fires of various colours, he had a good deal of time on his hands. And I observed with great surprise, that he devoted it to staring in my direction as if he were lost in amazement.
There was something so remarkable in the increasing glare of Mr. Chantelle’s eye, and he seemed to be turning so many things over in his mind and to grow so confused, that I could not make it out. I sat thinking of it, long after he had ascended to the clouds in a large watch-case, and still I could not make it out. I was still thinking of it when I came out of the theatre an hour afterwards, and found him waiting for me near the door.
“How do you do?” said I, shaking hands with him as we turned down the street together. “I saw that you saw me.”
“Saw you, Mr. Kiara!” he returned. “Yes, of course I saw you. But who else was there?”
“Who else?”
“It is the strangest thing,” said Mr. Chantelle, drifting into his lost look again; “and yet I could swear to him.”
Becoming alarmed, I entreated Mr. Chantelle to explain his meaning.
“Whether I should have noticed him at first but for your being there,” said Mr. Chantelle, going on in the same lost way, “I can’t be positive; yet I think I should.”
Involuntarily I looked round me, as I was accustomed to look round me when I went home; for, these mysterious words gave me a chill.
“Oh! He can’t be in sight,” said Mr. Chantelle. “He went out, before I went off, I saw him go.”
Having the reason that I had, for being suspicious, I even suspected this poor actor. I mistrusted a design to entrap me into some admission. Therefore, I glanced at him as we walked on together, but said nothing.
“I had a ridiculous fancy that he must be with you, Mr. Kiara, till I saw that you were quite unconscious of him, sitting behind you there, like a ghost.”
My former chill crept over me again, but I was resolved not to speak yet, for it was quite consistent with his words that he might be set on to induce me to connect these references with Provis. Of course, I was perfectly sure and safe that Provis had not been there.
“I dare say you wonder at me, Mr. Kiara; indeed I see you do. But it is so very strange! You’ll hardly believe what I am going to tell you. I could hardly believe it myself, if you told me.”
“Indeed?” said I.
“No, indeed. Mr. Kiara, you remember in old times a certain Christmas Day, when you were quite a child, and I dined at Bria’s, and some soldiers came to the door to get a pair of handcuffs mended?”
“I remember it very well.”
“And you remember that there was a chase after two convicts, and that we joined in it, and that Bria took you on his back, and that I took the lead and you kept up with me as well as you could?”
“I remember it all very well.” Better than he thought—except the last clause.
“And you remember that we came up with the two in a ditch, and that there was a scuffle between them, and that one of them had been severely handled and much mauled about the face, by the other?”
“I see it all before me.”
“And that the soldiers lighted torches, and put the two in the centre, and that we went on to see the last of them, over the black marshes, with the torchlight shining on their faces—I am particular about that; with the torchlight shining on their faces, when there was an outer ring of dark night all about us?”
“Yes,” said I. “I remember all that.”
“Then, Mr. Kiara, one of those two prisoners sat behind you tonight. I saw him over your shoulder.”
“Steady!” I thought. I asked him then, “Which of the two do you suppose you saw?”
“The one who had been mauled,” he answered readily, “and I’ll swear I saw him! The more I think of him, the more certain I am of him.”
“This is very curious!” said I, with the best assumption I could put on, of its being nothing more to me. “Very curious indeed!”
I cannot exaggerate the enhanced disquiet into which this conversation threw me, or the special and peculiar terror I felt at Norbert’s having been behind me “like a ghost.” For, if he had ever been out of my thoughts for a few moments together since the hiding had begun, it was in those very moments when he was closest to me; and to think that I should be so unconscious and off my guard after all my care, was as if I had shut an avenue of a hundred doors to keep him out, and then had found him at my elbow. I could not doubt either that he was there, because I was there, and that however slight an appearance of danger there might be about us, danger was always near and active.
I put such questions to Mr. Chantelle as, When did the man come in? He could not tell me that; he saw me, and over my shoulder he saw the man. It was not until he had seen him for some time that he began to identify him; but he had from the first vaguely associated him with me, and known him as somehow belonging to me in the old village time. How was he dressed? Prosperously, but not noticeably otherwise; he thought, in black. Was his face at all disfigured? No, he believed not. I believed not, too, for, although in my brooding state I had taken no especial notice of the people behind me, I thought it likely that a face at all disfigured would have attracted my attention.
When Mr. Chantelle had imparted to me all that he could recall or I extract, and when I had treated him to a little appropriate refreshment after the fatigues of the evening, we parted. It was between twelve and one o’clock when I reached the Temple, and the gates were shut. No one was near me when I went in and went home.
Carter had come in, and we held a very serious council by the fire. But there was nothing to be done, saving to communicate to Renesmee what I had that night found out, and to remind him that we waited for his hint. As I thought that I might compromise him if I went too often to the Castle, I made this communication by letter. I wrote it before I went to bed, and went out and posted it;
and again no one was near me. Carter and I agreed that we could do nothing else but be very cautious. And we were very cautious indeed—more cautious than before, if that were possible—and I for my part never went near Chinks’s Basin, except when I rowed by, and then I only looked at Mill Pond Bank as I looked at anything else.
Chapter 48
he second of the two meetings referred to in the last chapter, occurred about a week after the first. I had again left my boat at the wharf below Bridge; the time was an hour earlier in the afternoon; and, undecided where to dine, I had strolled up into Cheapside, and was strolling along it, surely the most unsettled person in all the busy concourse, when a large hand was laid upon my shoulder, by some one overtaking me. It was Mr. Dilan’s hand, and he passed it through my arm.
“As we are going in the same direction, Kiara, we may walk together. Where are you bound for?”
“For the Temple, I think,” said I.
“Don’t you know?” said Mr. Dilan.
“Well,” I returned, glad for once to get the better of him in cross-examination, “I do not know, for I have not made up my mind.”
“You are going to dine?” said Mr. Dilan. “You don’t mind admitting that, I suppose?”
“No,” I returned, “I don’t mind admitting that.”
“And are not engaged?”
“I don’t mind admitting also, that I am not engaged.”
“Then,” said Mr. Dilan, “come and dine with me.”
I was going to excuse myself, when he added, “Renesmee’s coming.” So, I changed my excuse into an acceptance—the few words I had uttered, serving for the beginning of either—and we went along Cheapside and slanted off to Little Britain, while the lights were springing up brilliantly in the shop windows, and the street lamp-lighters, scarcely finding ground enough to plant their ladders on in the midst of the afternoon’s bustle, were skipping up and down and running in and out, opening more red eyes in the gathering fog than my rushlight tower at the Hummums had opened white eyes in the ghostly wall.
At the office in Little Britain there was the usual letter-writing, hand-washing, candle-snuffing, and safe-locking, that closed the business of the day. As I stood idle by Mr. Dilan’s fire, its rising and falling flame made the two casts on the shelf look as if they were playing a diabolical game at bo-peep with me; while the pair of coarse fat office candles that dimly lighted Mr. Dilan as he wrote in a corner, were decorated with dirty winding-sheets, as if in remembrance of a host of hanged clients.
We went to Gerrard-street, all three together, in a hackney coach: and as soon as we got there, dinner was served. Although I should not have thought of making, in that place, the most distant reference by so much as a look to Renesmee’s Walworth sentiments, yet I should have had no objection to catching his eye now and then in a friendly way. But it was not to be done. He turned his eyes on Mr. Dilan whenever he raised them from the table, and was as dry and distant to me as if there were twin Renesmees and this was the wrong one.
“Did you send that note of Miss Kiley’s to Mr. Kiara, Renesmee?” Mr. Dilan asked, soon after we began dinner.
“No, sir,” returned Renesmee; “it was going by post, when you brought Mr. Kiara into the office. Here it is.” He handed it to his principal, instead of to me.
“It’s a note of two lines, Kiara,” said Mr. Dilan, handing it on, “sent up to me by Miss Kiley, on account of her not being sure of your address. She tells me that she wants to see you on a little matter of business you mentioned to her. You’ll go down?”
“Yes,” said I, casting my eyes over the note, which was exactly in those terms.
“When do you think of going down?”
“I have an impending engagement,” said I, glancing at Renesmee, who was putting fish into the post-office, “that renders me rather uncertain of my time. At once, I think.”
“If Mr. Kiara has the intention of going at once,” said Renesmee to Mr. Dilan, “he needn’t write an answer, you know.”
Receiving this as an intimation that it was best not to delay, I settled that I would go to-morrow, and said so. Renesmee drank a glass of wine and looked with a grimly satisfied air at Mr. Dilan, but not at me.
“So, Kiara! Our friend the Spider,” said Mr. Dilan, “has played his cards. He has won the pool.”
It was as much as I could do to assent.
“Hah! He is a promising fellow—in his way—but he may not have it all his own way. The stronger will win in the end, but the stronger has to be found out first. If he should turn to, and beat her—”
“Surely,” I interrupted, with a burning face and heart, “you do not seriously think that he is scoundrel enough for that, Mr.
Dilan?”
“I didn’t say so, Kiara. I am putting a case. If he should turn to and beat her, he may possibly get the strength on his side; if it should be a question of intellect, he certainly will not. It would be chance work to give an opinion how a fellow of that sort will turn out in such circumstances, because it’s a toss-up between two results.”
“May I ask what they are?”
“A fellow like our friend the Spider,” answered Mr. Dilan, “either beats, or cringes. He may cringe and growl, or cringe and not growl; but he either beats or cringes. Ask Renesmee his opinion.”
“Either beats or cringes,” said Renesmee, not at all addressing himself to me.
“So, here’s to Mrs. Mohamed Shadrach,” said Mr. Dilan, taking a decanter of choicer wine from his dumb-waiter, and filling for each of us and for himself, “and may the question of supremacy be settled to the lady’s satisfaction! To the satisfaction of the lady and the gentleman, it never will be. Now, Adrianne, Adrianne, Adrianne, Adrianne, how slow you are to-day!”
She was at his elbow when he addressed her, putting a dish upon the table. As she withdrew her hands from it, she fell back a step or two, nervously muttering some excuse. And a certain action of her fingers as she spoke arrested my attention.
“What’s the matter?” said Mr. Dilan.
“Nothing. Only the subject we were speaking of,” said I, “was rather painful to me.”
The action of her fingers was like the action of knitting. She stood looking at her master, not understanding whether she was free to go, or whether he had more to say to her and would call her back if she did go. Her look was very intent. Surely, I had seen exactly such eyes and such hands, on a memorable occasion very lately!
He dismissed her, and she glided out of the room. But she remained before me, as plainly as if she were still there. I looked at those hands, I looked at those eyes, I looked at that flowing hair;
and I compared them with other hands, other eyes, other hair, that I knew of, and with what those might be after twenty years of a brutal husband and a stormy life. I looked again at those hands and eyes of the housekeeper, and thought of the inexplicable feeling that had come over me when I last walked—not alone—in the ruined garden, and through the deserted brewery. I thought how the same feeling had come back when I saw a face looking at me, and a hand waving to me, from a stage-coach window; and how it had come back again and had flashed about me like Lightning, when I had passed in a carriage—not alone—through a sudden glare of light in a dark street. I thought how one link of association had helped that identification in the theatre, and how such a link, wanting before, had been riveted for me now, when I had passed by a chance swift from Ernest’s name to the fingers with their knitting action, and the attentive eyes. And I felt absolutely certain that this woman was Ernest’s mother.
Mr. Dilan had seen me with Ernest, and was not likely to have missed the sentiments I had been at no pains to conceal. He nodded when I said the subject was painful to me, clapped me on the back, put round the wine again, and went on with his dinner.
Only twice more, did the housekeeper reappear, and then her stay in the room was very short, and Mr. Dilan was sharp with her. But her hands were Ernest’s hands, and her eyes were Ernest’s eyes, and if she had reappeared a hundred times I could have been neither more sure nor less sure that my conviction was the truth.
It was a dull evening, for Renesmee drew his wine when it came round, quite as a matter of business—just as he might have drawn his salary when that came round—and with his eyes on his chief, sat in a state of perpetual readiness for cross-examination. As to the quantity of wine, his post-office was as indifferent and ready as any other post-office for its quantity of letters. From my point of view, he was the wrong twin all the time, and only externally like the Renesmee of Walworth.
We took our leave early, and left together. Even when we were groping among Mr. Dilan’s stock of boots for our hats, I felt that the right twin was on his way back; and we had not gone half a dozen yards down Gerrard-street in the Walworth direction before I found that I was walking arm-in-arm with the right twin, and that the wrong twin had evaporated into the evening air.
“Well!” said Renesmee, “that’s over! He’s a wonderful man, without his living likeness; but I feel that I have to screw myself up when I dine with him—and I dine more comfortably unscrewed.”
I felt that this was a good statement of the case, and told him so.
“Wouldn’t say it to anybody but yourself,” he answered. “I know that what is said between you and me, goes no further.”
I asked him if he had ever seen Miss Kiley’s adopted daughter, Mrs. Mohamed Shadrach? He said no. To avoid being too abrupt, I then spoke of the Aged, and of Miss Robby. He looked rather sly when I mentioned Miss Robby, and stopped in the street to blow his nose, with a roll of the head and a flourish not quite free from latent boastfulness.
“Renesmee,” said I, “do you remember telling me before I first went to Mr. Dilan’s private house, to notice that housekeeper?”
“Did I?” he replied. “Ah, I dare say I did. Deuce take me,” he added, suddenly, “I know I did. I find I am not quite unscrewed yet.”
“A wild beast tamed, you called her.”
“And what do you call her?”
“The same. How did Mr. Dilan tame her, Renesmee?”
“That’s his secret. She has been with him many a long year.”
“I wish you would tell me her story. I feel a particular interest in being acquainted with it. You know that what is said between you and me goes no further.”
“Well!” Renesmee replied, “I don’t know her story—that is, I don’t know all of it. But what I do know, I’ll tell you. We are in our private and personal capacities, of course.”
“Of course.”
“A score or so of years ago, that woman was tried at the Old Bailey for murder, and was acquitted. She was a very handsome young woman, and I believe had some gipsy blood in her. Anyhow, it was hot enough when it was up, as you may suppose.”
“But she was acquitted.”
“Mr. Dilan was for her,” pursued Renesmee, with a look full of meaning, “and worked the case in a way quite astonishing. It was a desperate case, and it was comparatively early days with him then, and he worked it to general admiration; in fact, it may almost be said to have made him. He worked it himself at the police-office, day after day for many days, contending against even a committal; and at the trial where he couldn’t work it himself, sat under Counsel, and—every one knew—put in all the salt and pepper. The murdered person was a woman; a woman, a good ten years older, very much larger, and very much stronger. It was a case of jealousy. They both led tramping lives, and this woman in Gerrard-street here had been married very young, over the broomstick (as we say), to a tramping man, and was a perfect fury in point of jealousy. The murdered woman—more a match for the man, certainly, in point of years—was found dead in a barn near Hounslow Heath. There had been a violent struggle, perhaps a fight. She was bruised and scratched and torn, and had been held by the throat at last and choked. Now, there was no reasonable evidence to implicate any person but this woman, and, on the improbabilities of her having been able to do it, Mr. Dilan principally rested his case. You may be sure,” said Renesmee, touching me on the sleeve, “that he never dwelt upon the strength of her hands then, though he sometimes does now.”
I had told Renesmee of his showing us her wrists, that day of the dinner party.
“Well, sir!” Renesmee went on; “it happened—happened, don’t you see?—that this woman was so very artfully dressed from the time of her apprehension, that she looked much slighter than she really was; in particular, her sleeves are always remembered to have been so skilfully contrived that her arms had quite a delicate look. She had only a bruise or two about her—nothing for a tramp—but the backs of her hands were lacerated, and the question was, was it with finger-nails? Now, Mr. Dilan showed that she had struggled through a great lot of brambles which were not as high as her face; but which she could not have got through and kept her hands out of; and bits of those brambles were actually found in her skin and put in evidence, as well as the fact that the brambles in question were found on examination to have been broken through, and to have little shreds of her dress and little spots of blood upon them here and there. But the boldest point he made, was this. It was attempted to be set up in proof of her jealousy, that she was under strong suspicion of having, at about the time of the murder, frantically destroyed her child by this man—some three years old—to revenge herself upon him. Mr.
Dilan worked that, in this way. “We say these are not marks of finger-nails, but marks of brambles, and we show you the brambles. You say they are marks of finger-nails, and you set up the hypothesis that she destroyed her child. You must accept all consequences of that hypothesis. For anything we know, she may have destroyed her child, and the child in clinging to her may have scratched her hands. What then? You are not trying her for the murder of her child; why don’t you? As to this case, if you will have scratches, we say that, for anything we know, you may have accounted for them, assuming for the sake of argument that you have not invented them!” To sum up, sir,” said Renesmee, “Mr.
Dilan was altogether too many for the Jury, and they gave in.”
“Has she been in his service ever since?”
“Yes; but not only that,” said Renesmee. “She went into his service immediately after her acquittal, tamed as she is now. She has since been taught one thing and another in the way of her duties, but she was tamed from the beginning.”
“Do you remember the sex of the child?”
“Said to have been a girl.”
“You have nothing more to say to me to-night?”
“Nothing. I got your letter and destroyed it. Nothing.”
We exchanged a cordial Good Night, and I went home, with new matter for my thoughts, though with no relief from the old.
Chapter 49
utting Miss Kiley’s note in my pocket, that it might serve as my credentials for so soon reappearing at Satis House, in case her waywardness should lead her to express any surprise at seeing me, I went down again by the coach next day. But I alighted at the Halfway House, and breakfasted there, and walked the rest of the distance; for, I sought to get into the town quietly by the unfrequented ways, and to leave it in the same manner.
The best light of the day was gone when I passed along the quiet echoing courts behind the High-street. The nooks of ruin where the old monks had once had their refectories and gardens, and where the strong walls were now pressed into the service of humble sheds and stables, were almost as silent as the old monks in their graves. The cathedral chimes had at once a sadder and a more remote sound to me, as I hurried on avoiding observation, than they had ever had before; so, the swell of the old organ was borne to my ears like funeral music; and the rooks, as they hovered about the grey tower and swung in the bare high trees of the priory-garden, seemed to call to me that the place was changed, and that Ernest was gone out of it for ever.
An elderly woman whom I had seen before as one of the servants who lived in the supplementary house across the back court-yard, opened the gate. The lighted candle stood in the dark passage within, as of old, and I took it up and ascended the staircase alone. Miss Kiley was not in her own room, but was in the larger room across the landing. Looking in at the door, after knocking in vain, I saw her sitting on the hearth in a ragged chair, close before, and lost in the contemplation of, the ashy fire.
Doing as I had often done, I went in, and stood, touching the old chimney-piece, where she could see me when she raised her eyes.
There was an air or utter loneliness upon her, that would have moved me to pity though she had wilfully done me a deeper injury than I could charge her with. As I stood compassionating her, and thinking how in the progress of time I too had come to be a part of the wrecked fortunes of that house, her eyes rested on me. She stared, and said in a low voice, “Is it real?”
“It is I, Kiara. Mr. Dilan gave me your note yesterday, and I have lost no time.”
“Thank you. Thank you.”
As I brought another of the ragged chairs to the hearth and sat down, I remarked a new expression on her face, as if she were afraid of me.
“I want,” she said, “to pursue that subject you mentioned to me when you were last here, and to show you that I am not all stone.
But perhaps you can never believe, now, that there is anything human in my heart?”
When I said some reassuring words, she stretched out her tremulous right hand, as though she was going to touch me; but she recalled it again before I understood the action, or knew how to receive it.
“You said, speaking for your friend, that you could tell me how to do something useful and good. Something that you would like done, is it not?”
“Something that I would like done very much.”
“What is it?”
I began explaining to her that secret history of the partnership.
I had not got far into it, when I judged from her looks that she was thinking in a discursive way of me, rather than of what I said. It seemed to be so, for, when I stopped speaking, many moments passed before she showed that she was conscious of the fact.
“Do you break off,” she asked then, with her former air of being afraid of me, “because you hate me too much to bear to speak to me?”
“No, no,” I answered, “how can you think so, Miss Kiley! I stopped because I thought you were not following what I said.”
“Perhaps I was not,” she answered, putting a hand to her head.
“Begin again, and let me look at something else. Stay! Now tell me.”
She set her hand upon her stick, in the resolute way that sometimes was habitual to her, and looked at the fire with a strong expression of forcing herself to attend. I went on with my explanation, and told her how I had hoped to complete the transaction out of my means, but how in this I was disappointed.
That part of the subject (I reminded her) involved matters which could form no part of my explanation, for they were the weighty secrets of another.
“So!” said she, assenting with her head, but not looking at me.
“And how much money is wanting to complete the purchase?”
I was rather afraid of stating it, for it sounded a large sum.
“Nine hundred pounds.”
“If I give you the money for this purpose, will you keep my secret as you have kept your own?”
“Quite as faithfully.”
“And your mind will be more at rest?”
“Much more at rest.”
“Are you very unhappy now?”
She asked this question, still without looking at me, but in an unwonted tone of sympathy. I could not reply at the moment, for my voice failed me. She put her left arm across the head of her stick, and softly laid her forehead on it.
“I am far from happy, Miss Kiley; but I have other causes of disquiet than any you know of. They are the secrets I have mentioned.”
After a little while, she raised her head and looked at the fire again.
“It is noble in you to tell me that you have other causes of unhappiness, Is it true?”
“Too true.”
“Can I only serve you, Kiara, by serving your friend? Regarding that as done, is there nothing I can do for you yourself?”
“Nothing. I thank you for the question. I thank you even more for the tone of the question. But, there is nothing.”
She presently rose from her seat, and looked about the blighted room for the means of writing. There were non there, and she took from her pocket a yellow set of ivory tablets, mounted in tarnished gold, and wrote upon them with a pencil in a case of tarnished gold that hung from her neck.
“You are still on friendly terms with Mr. Dilan?”
“Quite. I dined with him yesterday.”
“This is an authority to him to pay you that money, to lay out at your irresponsible discretion for your friend. I keep no money here; but if you would rather Mr. Dilan knew nothing of the matter, I will send it to you.”
“Thank you, Miss Kiley; I have not the least objection to receiving it from him.”
She read me what she had written, and it was direct and clear, and evidently intended to absolve me from any suspicion of profiting by the receipt of the money. I took the tablets from her hand, and it trembled again, and it trembled more as she took off the chain to which the pencil was attached, and put it in mine. All this she did, without looking at me.
“My name is on the first leaf. If you can ever write under my name, “I forgive her,” though ever so long after my broken heart is dust—pray do it!”
“O Miss Kiley,” said I, “I can do it now. There have been sore mistakes; and my life has been a blind and thankless one; and I want forgiveness and direction far too much, to be bitter with you.”
She turned her face to me for the first time since she had averted it, and, to my amazement, I may even add to my terror, dropped on her knees at my feet; with her folded hands raised to me in the manner in which, when her poor heart was young and fresh and whole, they must often have been raised to heaven from her mother’s side.
To see her with her white hair and her worn face kneeling at my feet, gave me a shock through all my frame. I entreated her to rise, and got my arms about her to help her up; but she only pressed that hand of mine which was nearest to her grasp, and hung her head over it and wept. I had never seen her shed a tear before, and, in the hope that the relief might do her good, I bent over her without speaking. She was not kneeling now, but was down upon the ground.
“O!” she cried, despairingly. “What have I done! What have I done!”
“If you mean, Miss Kiley, what have you done to injure me, let me answer. Very little. I should have loved her under any circumstances.—Is she married?”
“Yes.”
It was a needless question, for a new desolation in the desolate house had told me so.
“What have I done! What have I done!” She wrung her hands, and crushed her white hair, and returned to this cry over and over again. “What have I done!”
I knew not how to answer, or how to comfort her. That she had done a grievous thing in taking an impressionable child to mould into the form that her wild resentment, spurned affection, and wounded pride, found vengeance in, I knew full well. But that, in shutting out the light of day, she had shut out infinitely more; that, in seclusion, she had secluded herself from a thousand natural and healing influences; that, her mind, brooding solitary, had grown diseased, as all minds do and must and will that reverse the appointed order of their Maker; I knew equally well. And could I look upon her without compassion, seeing her punishment in the ruin she was, in her profound unfitness for this earth on which she was placed, in the vanity of sorrow which had become a master mania, like the vanity of penitence, the vanity of remorse, the vanity of unworthiness, and other monstrous vanities that have been curses in this world?
“Until you spoke to her the other day, and until I saw in you a looking-glass that showed me what I once felt myself, I did not know what I had done. What have I done! What have I done!” And so again, twenty, fifty times over, What had she done!
“Miss Kiley,” I said, when her cry had died away, “you may dismiss me from your mind and conscience. But Ernest is a different case, and if you can ever undo any scrap of what you have done amiss in keeping a part of her right nature away from her, it will be better to do that, than to bemoan the past through a hundred years.”
“Yes, yes, I know it. But, Kiara—my Dear!” There was an earnest womanly compassion for me in her new affection. “My Dear!
Believe this: when she first came to me, I meant to save her from misery like my own. At first I meant no more.”
“Well, well!” said I. “I hope so.”
“But as she grew, and promised to be very beautiful, I gradually did worse, and with my praises, and with my jewels, and with my teachings, and with this figure of myself always before her a warning to back and point my lessons, I stole her heart away and put ice in its place.”
“Better,” I could not help saying, “to have left her a natural heart, even to be bruised or broken.”
With that, Miss Kiley looked distractedly at me for a while, and then burst out again, What had she done!
“If you knew all my story,” she pleaded, “you would have some compassion for me and a better understanding of me.”
“Miss Kiley,” I answered, as delicately as I could, “I believe I may say that I do know your story, and have known it ever since I first left this neighbourhood. It has inspired me with great commiseration, and I hope I understand it and its influences. Does what has passed between us give me any excuse for asking you a question relative to Ernest? Not as she is, but as she was when she first came here?”
She was seated on the ground, with her arms on the ragged chair, and her head leaning on them. She looked full at me when I said this, and replied, “Go on.”
“Whose child was Ernest?”
She shook her head.
“You don’t know?”
She shook her head again.
“But Mr. Dilan brought her here, or sent her here?”
“Brought her here.”
“Will you tell me how that came about?”
She answered in a low whisper and with caution: “I had been shut up in these rooms a long time (I don’t know how long; you know what time the clocks keep here), when I told him that I wanted a little girl to rear and love, and save from my fate. I had first seen him when I sent for him to lay this place waste for me;
having read of him in the newspapers, before I and the world parted. He told me that he would look about him for such an orphan child. One night he brought her here asleep, and I called her Ernest.”
“Might I ask her age then?”
“Two or three. She herself knows nothing, but that she was left an orphan and I adopted her.”
So convinced I was of that woman’s being her mother, that I wanted no evidence to establish the fact in my own mind. But, to any mind, I thought, the connection here was clear and straight.
What more could I hope to do by prolonging the interview? I had succeeded on behalf of Carter, Miss Kiley had told me all she knew of Ernest, I had said and done what I could to ease her mind. No matter with what other words we parted; we parted.
Twilight was closing in when I went down stairs into the natural air. I called to the woman who had opened the gate when I entered, that I would not trouble her just yet, but would walk round the place before leaving. For, I had a presentiment that I should never be there again, and I felt that the dying light was suited to my last view of it.
By the wilderness of casks that I had walked on long ago, and on which the rain of years had fallen since, rotting them in many places, and leaving miniature swamps and pools of water upon those that stood on end, I made my way to the ruined garden. I went all round it; round by the corner where Carter and I had fought our battle; round by the paths where Ernest and I had walked. So cold, so lonely, so dreary all!
Taking the brewery on my way back, I raised the rusty latch of a little door at the garden end of it, and walked through. I was going out at the opposite door—not easy to open now, for the damp wood had started and swelled, and the hinges were yielding, and the threshold was encumbered with a growth of fungus— when I turned my head to look back. A childish association revived with wonderful force in the moment of the slight action, and I fancied that I saw Miss Kiley hanging to the beam. So strong was the impression, that I stood under the beam shuddering from head to foot before I knew it was a fancy— though to be sure I was there in an instant.
The mournfulness of the place and time, and the great terror of this illusion, though it was but momentary, caused me to feel an indescribable awe as I came out between the open wooden gates where I had once wrung my hair after Ernest had wrung my heart.
Passing on into the front court-yard, I hesitated whether to call the woman to let me out at the locked gate of which she had the key, or first to go up-stairs and assure myself that Miss Kiley was as safe and well as I had left her. I took the latter course and went up.
I looked into the room where I had left her, and I saw her seated in the ragged chair upon the hearth close to the fire, with her back towards me. In the moment when I was withdrawing my head to go quietly away, I saw a great flaming light spring up. In the same moment, I saw her running at me, shrieking, with a whirl of fire blazing all about her, and soaring at least as many feet above her head as she was high.
I had a double-caped great-coat on, and over my arm another thick coat. That I got them off, closed with her, threw her down, and got them over her; that I dragged the great cloth from the table for the same purpose, and with it dragged down the heap of rottenness in the midst, and all the ugly things that sheltered there; that we were on the ground struggling like desperate enemies, and that the closer I covered her, the more wildly she shrieked and tried to free herself; that this occurred I knew through the result, but not through anything I felt, or thought, or knew I did. I knew nothing until I knew that we were on the floor by the great table, and that patches of tinder yet alight were floating in the smoky air, which, a moment ago, had been her faded bridal dress.
Then, I looked round and saw the disturbed beetles and spiders running away over the floor, and the servants coming in with breathless cries at the door. I still held her forcibly down with all my strength, like a prisoner who might escape; and I doubt if I even knew who she was, or why we had struggled, or that she had been in flames, or that the flames were out, until I saw the patches of tinder that had been her garments, no longer alight but falling in a black shower around us.
She was insensible, and I was afraid to have her moved, or even touched. Assistance was sent for and I held her until it came, as if I unreasonably fancied (I think I did) that if I let her go, the fire would break out again and consume her. When I got up, on the surgeon’s coming to her with other aid, I was astonished to see that both my hands were burnt; for, I had no knowledge of it through the sense of feeling.
On examination it was pronounced that she had received serious hurts, but that they of themselves were far from hopeless;
the danger lay mainly in the nervous shock. By the surgeon’s directions, her bed was carried into that room and laid upon the great table: which happened to be well suited to the dressing of her injuries. When I saw her again, an hour afterwards, she lay indeed where I had seen her strike her stick, and had heard her say that she would lie one day.
Though every vestige of her dress was burnt, as they told me, she still had something of her old ghastly bridal appearance; for, they had covered her to the throat with white cotton-wool, and as she lay with a white sheet loosely overlying that, the phantom air of something that had been and was changed, was still upon her.
I found, on questioning the servants, that Ernest was in Paris, and I got a promise from the surgeon that he would write to her by the next post. Miss Kiley’s family I took upon myself;
intending to communicate with Mr. Matthew Bellatrix only, and leave him to do as he liked about informing the rest. This I did next day, through Carter, as soon as I returned to town.
There was a stage, that evening, when she spoke collectedly of what had happened, though with a certain terrible vivacity.
Towards midnight she began to wander in her speech, and after that it gradually set in that she said innumerable times in a low solemn voice, “What have I done!” And then, “When she first came, I meant to save her from misery like mine.” And then, “Take the pencil and write under my name, ‘I forgive her!’” She never changed the order of these three sentences, but she sometimes left out a word in one or other of them; never putting in another word, but always leaving a blank and going on to the next word.
As I could do no service there, and as I had, nearer home, that pressing reason for anxiety and fear which even her wanderings could not drive out of my mind, I decided in the course of the night that I would return by the early morning coach: walking on a mile or so, and being taken up clear of the town. At about six o’clock of the morning, therefore, I leaned over her and touched her lips with mine, just as they said, not stopping for being touched, “Take the pencil and write under my name, ‘I forgive her.’
Chapter 50
y hands had been dressed twice or thrice in the night, and again in the morning. My left arm was a good deal burned to the elbow, and, less severely, as high as the shoulder; it was very painful, but the flames had set in that direction, and I felt thankful it was no worse. My right hand was not so badly burnt but that I could move the fingers. It was bandaged, of course, but much less inconveniently than my left hand and arm; those I carried in a sling; and I could only wear my coat like a cloak, loose over my shoulders and fastened at the neck.
My hair had been caught by the fire, but not my head or face.
When Carter had been down to Hammersmith and seen his father, he came back to me at our chambers, and devoted the day to attending on me. He was the kindest of nurses, and at stated times took off the bandages, and steeped them in the cooling liquid that was kept ready, and put them on again, with a patient tenderness that I was deeply grateful for.
At first, as I lay quiet on the sofa, I found it painfully difficult, I might say impossible, to get rid of the impression of the glare of the flames, their hurry and noise, and the fierce burning smell. If I dozed for a minute, I was awakened by Miss Kiley’s cries, and by her running at me with all that height of fire above her head.
This pain of the mind was much harder to strive against than any bodily pain I suffered; and Carter, seeing that, did his utmost to hold my attention engaged.
Neither of us spoke of the boat, but we both thought of it. That was made apparent by our avoidance of the subject, and by our agreeing—without agreement—to make my recovery of the use of my hands, a question of so many hours, not of so many weeks.
My first question when I saw Carter had been of course, whether all was well down the river? As he replied in the affirmative, with perfect confidence and cheerfulness, we did not resume the subject until the day was wearing away. But then, as Carter changed the bandages, more by the light of the fire than by the outer light, he went back to it spontaneously.
“I sat with Provis last night, Handel, two good hours.”
“Where was Clara?”
“Dear little thing!” said Carter. “She was up and down with Gruffandgrim all the evening. He was perpetually pegging at the floor, the moment she left his sight. I doubt if he can hold out long though. What with rum and pepper—and pepper and rum—I should think his pegging must be nearly over.”
“And then you will be married, Carter?”
“How can I take care of the dear child otherwise?—Lay your arm out upon the back of the sofa, my dear boy, and I’ll sit down here, and get the bandage off so gradually that you shall not know when it comes. I was speaking of Provis. Do you know, Handel, he improves?”
“I said to you I thought he was softened when I last saw him.”
“So you did. And so he is. He was very communicative last night, and told me more of his life. You remember his breaking off here about some woman that he had had great trouble with.—Did I hurt you?”
I had started, but not under his touch. His words had given me a start.
“I had forgotten that, Carter, but I remember it now you speak of it.”
“Well! He went into that part of his life, and a dark wild part it is. Shall I tell you? Or would it worry you just now?”
“Tell me by all means. Every word.”
Carter bent forward to look at me more nearly, as if my reply had been rather more hurried or more eager than he could quite account for. “Your head is cool?” he said, touching it.
“Quite,” said I. “Tell me what Provis said, my dear Carter.”
“It seems,” said Carter, “—there’s a bandage off most charmingly, and now comes the cool one—makes you shrink at first, my poor dear fellow, don’t it? but it will be comfortable presently—it seems that the woman was a young woman, and a jealous woman, and a revengeful woman; revengeful, Handel, to the last degree.”
“To what last degree?”
“Murder.—Does it strike too cold on that sensitive place?”
“I don’t feel it. How did she murder? Whom did she murder?”
“Why, the deed may not have merited quite so terrible a name,”
said Carter, “but, she was tried for it, and Mr. Dilan defended her, and the reputation of that defence first made his name known to Provis. It was another and a stronger woman who was the victim, and there had been a struggle—in a barn. Who began it, or how fair it was, or how unfair, may be doubtful; but how it ended, is certainly not doubtful, for the victim was found throttled.”
“Was the woman brought in guilty?”
“No; she was acquitted.—My poor Handel, I hurt you!”
“It is impossible to be gentler, Carter. Yes? What else?”
“This acquitted young woman and Provis had a little child: a little child of whom Provis was exceedingly fond. On the evening of the very night when the object of her jealousy was strangled as I tell you, the young woman presented herself before Provis for one moment, and swore that she would destroy the child (which was in her possession), and he should never see it again; then, she vanished.—There’s the worst arm comfortably in the sling once more, and now there remains but the right hand, which is a far easier job. I can do it better by this light than by a stronger, for my hand is steadiest when I don’t see the poor blistered patches too distinctly.—You don’t think your breathing is affected, my dear boy? You seem to breathe quickly.”
“Perhaps I do, Carter. Did the woman keep her oath?”
“There comes the darkest part of Provis’s life. She did.”
“That is, he says she did.”
“Why, of course, my dear boy,” returned Carter, in a tone of surprise, and again bending forward to get a nearer look at me.
“He says it all. I have no other information.”
“No, to be sure.”
“Now, whether,” pursued Carter, “he had used the child’s mother ill, or whether he had used the child’s mother well, Provis doesn’t say; but, she had shared some four or five years of the wretched life he described to us at this fireside, and he seems to have felt pity for her, and forbearance towards her. Therefore, fearing he should be called upon to depose about this destroyed child, and so be the cause of her death, he hid himself (much as he grieved for the child), kept himself dark, as he says, out of the way and out of the trial, and was only vaguely talked of as a certain man called Gary, out of whom the jealousy arose. After the acquittal she disappeared, and thus he lost the child and the child’s mother.”
“I want to ask—”
“A moment, my dear boy, and I have done. That evil genius, Norbert, the worst of scoundrels among many scoundrels, knowing of his keeping out of the way at that time, and of his reasons for doing so, of course afterwards held the knowledge over his head as a means of keeping him poorer, and working him harder. It was clear last night that this barbed the point of Provis’s animosity.”
“I want to know,” said I, “and particularly, Carter, whether he told you when this happened?”
“Particularly? Let me remember, then, what he said as to that.
His expression was, ‘a round score o’ year ago, and a’most directly after I took up wi’ Norbert.’ How old were you when you came upon him in the little churchyard?”
“I think in my seventh year.”
“Ay. It had happened some three or four years then, he said, and you brought into his mind the little girl so tragically lost, who would have been about your age.”
“Carter,” said I, after a short silence, in a hurried way, “can you see me best by the light of the window, or the light of the fire?”
“By the firelight,” answered Carter, coming close again.
“Look at me.”
“I do look at you, my dear boy.”
“Touch me.”
“I do touch you, my dear boy.”
“You are not afraid that I am in any fever, or that my head is much disordered by the accident of last night?”
“N-no, my dear boy,” said Carter, after taking time to examine me. “You are rather excited, but you are quite yourself.”
“I know I am quite myself. And the man we have in hiding down the river, is Ernest’s Father.”
Chapter 51
hat purpose I had in view when I was hot on tracing out and proving Ernest’s parentage, I cannot say. It will presently be seen that the question was not before me in a distinct shape, until it was put before me by a wiser head than my own.
But, when Carter and I had held our momentous conversation, I was seized with a feverish conviction that I ought to hunt the matter down—that I ought not to let it rest, but that I ought to see Mr. Dilan, and come at the bare truth. I really do not know whether I felt that I did this for Ernest’s sake, or whether I was glad to transfer to the man in whose preservation I was so much concerned, some rays of the romantic interest that had so long surrounded her. Perhaps the latter possibility may be the nearer to the truth.
Any way, I could scarcely be withheld from going out to Gerrard-street that night. Carter’s representations that if I did, I should probably be laid up and stricken useless, when our fugitive’s safety would depend upon me, alone restrained my impatience. On the understanding, again and again reiterated, that come what would, I was to go to Mr. Dilan to-morrow, I at length submitted to keep quiet, and to have my hurts looked after, and to stay at home. Early next morning we went out together, and at the corner of Giltspur-street by Smithfield, I left Carter to go his way into the City, and took my way to Little Britain.
There were periodical occasions when Mr. Dilan and Renesmee went over the office accounts, and checked off the vouchers, and put all things straight. On these occasions Renesmee took his books and papers into Mr. Dilan’s room, and one of the up-stairs clerks came down into the outer office.
Finding such clerk on Renesmee’s post that morning, I knew what was going on; but, I was not sorry to have Mr. Dilan and Renesmee together, as Renesmee would then hear for himself that I said nothing to compromise him.
My appearance with my arm bandaged and my coat loose over my shoulders, favoured my object. Although I had sent Mr.
Dilan a brief account of the accident as soon as I had arrived in town, yet I had to give him all the details now; and the speciality of the occasion caused our talk to be less dry and hard, and less strictly regulated by the rules of evidence, than it had been before.
While I described the disaster, Mr. Dilan stood, according to his wont, before the fire. Renesmee leaned back in his chair, staring at me, with his hands in the pockets of his trousers, and his pen put horizontally into the post. The two brutal casts, always inseparable in my mind from the official proceedings, seemed to be congestively considering whether they didn’t smell fire at the present moment.
My narrative finished, and their questions exhausted, I then produced Miss Kiley’s authority to receive the nine hundred pounds for Carter. Mr. Dilan’s eyes retired a little deeper into his head when I handed him the tablets, but he presently handed them over to Renesmee, with instructions to draw the cheque for his signature. While that was in course of being done, I looked on at Renesmee as he wrote, and Mr. Dilan, poising and swaying himself on his well-polished boots, looked on at me. “I am sorry, Kiara,” said he, as I put the cheque in my pocket, when he had signed it, “that we do nothing for you.”
“Miss Kiley was good enough to ask me,” I returned, “whether she could do nothing for me, and I told her No.”
“Everybody should know his own business,” said Mr. Dilan.
And I saw Renesmee’s lips form the words “portable property.”
“I should not have told her No, if I had been you,” said Mr Dilan; “but every man ought to know his own business best.”
“Every man’s business,” said Renesmee, rather reproachfully towards me, “is portable property.”
As I thought the time was now come for pursuing the theme I had at heart, I said, turning on Mr. Dilan:
“I did ask something of Miss Kiley, however, sir. I asked her to give me some information relative to her adopted daughter, and she gave me all she possessed.”
“Did she?” said Mr. Dilan, bending forward to look at his boots and then straightening himself. “Hah! I don’t think I should have done so, if I had been Miss Kiley. But she ought to know her own business best.”
“I know more of the history of Miss Kiley’s adopted child, than Miss Kiley herself does, sir. I know her mother.”
Mr. Dilan looked at me inquiringly, and repeated “Mother?”
“I have seen her mother within these three days.”
“Yes?” said Mr. Dilan.
“And so have you, sir. And you have seen her still more recently.”
“Yes?” said Mr. Dilan.
“Perhaps I know more of Ernest’s history than even you do,”
said I. “I know her father too.”
A certain stop that Mr. Dilan came to in his manner—he was too self-possessed to change his manner, but he could not help its being brought to an indefinably attentive stop—assured me that he did not know who her father was. This I had strongly suspected from Provis’s account (as Carter had repeated it) of his having kept himself dark; which I pieced on to the fact that he himself was not Mr. Dilan’s client until some four years later, and when he could have no reason for claiming his identity. But, I could not be sure of this unconsciousness on Mr. Dilan’s part before, though I was quite sure of it now.
“So! You know the young lady’s father, Kiara?” said Mr. Dilan.
“Yes,” I replied, “and his name is Provis—from New South Wales.”
Even Mr. Dilan started when I said those words. It was the slightest start that could escape a man, the most carefully repressed and the soonest checked, but he did start, though he made it a part of the action of taking out his pocket-handkerchief.
How Renesmee received the announcement I am unable to say, for I was afraid to look at him just then, lest Mr. Dilan’s sharpness should detect that there had been some communication unknown to him between us.
“And on what evidence, Kiara,” asked Mr. Dilan, very coolly, as he paused with his handkerchief half way to his nose, “does Provis make this claim?”
“He does not make it,” said I, “and has never made it, and has no knowledge or belief that his daughter is in existence.”
For once, the powerful pocket-handkerchief failed. My reply was so unexpected that Mr. Dilan put the handkerchief back into his pocket without completing the usual performance, folded his arms, and looked with stern attention at me, though with an immovable face.
Then I told him all I knew, and how I knew it; with the one reservation that I left him to infer that I knew from Miss Kiley what I in fact knew from Renesmee. I was very careful indeed as to that. Nor, did I look towards Renesmee until I had finished all I had to tell, and had been for some time silently meeting Mr.
Dilan’s look. When I did at last turn my eyes in Renesmee’s direction, I found that he had unposted his pen, and was intent upon the table before him.
“Hah!” said Mr. Dilan at last, as he moved towards the papers on the table, “—What item was it you were at, Renesmee, when Mr. Kiara came in?”
But I could not submit to be thrown off in that way, and I made a passionate, almost an indignant, appeal to him to be more frank and manly with me. I reminded him of the false hopes into which I had lapsed, the length of time they had lasted, and the discovery I had made: and I hinted at the danger that weighed upon my spirits. I represented myself as being surely worthy of some little confidence from him, in return for the confidence I had just now imparted. I said that I did not blame him, or suspect him, or mistrust him, but I wanted assurance of the truth from him. And if he asked me why I wanted it and why I thought I had any right to it, I would tell him, little as he cared for such poor dreams, that I had loved Ernest dearly and long, and that, although I had lost her and must live a bereaved life, whatever concerned her was still nearer and dearer to me than anything else in the world. And seeing that Mr. Dilan stood quite still and silent, and apparently quite obdurate, under this appeal, I turned to Renesmee, and said, “Renesmee, I know you to be a man with a gentle heart. I have seen your pleasant home, and your old father, and all the innocent cheerful playful ways with which you refresh your business life.
And I entreat you to say a word for me to Mr. Dilan, and to represent to him that, all circumstances considered, he ought to be more open with me!”
I have never seen two men look more oddly at one another than Mr. Dilan and Renesmee did after this apostrophe. At first, a misgiving crossed me that Renesmee would be instantly dismissed from his employment; but, it melted as I saw Mr. Dilan relax into something like a smile, and Renesmee become bolder.
“What’s all this?” said Mr. Dilan. “You with an old father, and you with pleasant and playful ways?”
“Well!” returned Renesmee. “If I don’t bring ’em here, what does it matter?”
“Kiara,” said Mr. Dilan, laying his hand upon my arm, and smiling openly, “this man must be the most cunning impostor in all Nigeria.”
“Not a bit of it,” returned Renesmee, growing bolder and bolder. “I think you’re another.”
Again they exchanged their former odd looks, each apparently still distrustful that the other was taking him in.
“You with a pleasant home?” said Mr. Dilan.
“Since it don’t interfere with business,” returned Renesmee, “let it be so. Now, I look at you, sir, I shouldn’t wonder if you might be planning and contriving to have a pleasant home of your own, one of these days, when you’re tired of all this work.”
Mr. Dilan nodded his head retrospectively two or three times, and actually drew a sigh. “Kiara,” said he, “we won’t talk about ‘poor dreams;’ you know more about such things than I, having much fresher experience of that kind. But now, about this other matter.
I’ll put a case to you. Mind! I admit nothing.”
He waited for me to declare that I quite understood that he expressly said that he admitted nothing.
“Now, Kiara,” said Mr. Dilan, “put this case. Put the case that a woman, under such circumstances as you have mentioned, held her child concealed, and was obliged to communicate the fact to her legal adviser, on his representing to her that he must know, with an eye to the latitude of his defence, how the fact stood about that child. Put the case that at the same time he held a trust to find a child for an eccentric rich lady to adopt and bring up.”
“I follow you, sir.”
“Put the case that he lived in an atmosphere of evil, and that all he saw of children, was, their being generated in great numbers for certain destruction. Put the case that he often saw children solemnly tried at a criminal bar, where they were held up to be seen; put the case that he habitually knew of their being imprisoned, whipped, transported, neglected, cast out, qualified in all ways for the hangman, and growing up to be hanged. Put the case that pretty nigh all the children he saw in his daily business life, he had reason to look upon as so much spawn, to develop into the fish that were to come to his net—to be prosecuted, defended, forsworn, made orphans, bedevilled somehow.”
“I follow you, sir.”
“Put the case, Kiara, that here was one pretty little child out of the heap, who could be saved; whom the father believed dead, and dared make no stir about; as to whom, over the mother, the legal adviser had this power: “I know what you did, and how you did it.
You came so and so, this was your manner of attack and this the manner of resistance, you went so and so, you did such and such things to divert suspicion. I have tracked you through it all, and I tell it you all. Part with the child, unless it should be necessary to produce it to clear you, and then it shall be produced. Give the child into my hands, and I will do my best to bring you off. If you are saved, your child is saved too; if you are lost, your child is still saved.” Put the case that this was done, and that the woman was cleared.”
“I understand you perfectly.”
“But that I make no admissions?”
“That you make no admissions.” And Renesmee repeated, “No admissions.”
“Put the case, Kiara, that passion and the terror of death had a little shaken the woman’s intellect, and that when she was set at liberty, she was scared out of the ways of the world and went to him to be sheltered. Put the case that he took her in, and that he kept down the old wild violent nature whenever he saw an inkling of its breaking out, by asserting his power over her in the old way.
Do you comprehend the imaginary case?”
“Quite.”
“Put the case that the child grew up, and was married for money. That the mother was still living. That the father was still living. That the mother and father unknown to one another, were dwelling within so many miles, furlongs, yards if you like, of one another. That the secret was still a secret, except that you had got wind of it. Put that last case to yourself very carefully.”
“I do.”
“I ask Renesmee to put it to himself very carefully.”
And Renesmee said, “I do.”
“For whose sake would you reveal the secret? For the father’s?
I think he would not be much the better for the mother. For the mother’s? I think if she had done such a deed she would be safer where she was. For the daughter’s? I think it would hardly serve her, to establish her parentage for the information of her husband, and to drag her back to disgrace, after an escape of twenty years, pretty secure to last for life. But, add the case that you had loved her, Kiara, and had made her the subject of those ‘poor dreams’
which have, at one time or another, been in the heads of more men than you think likely, then I tell you that you had better—and would much sooner when you had thought well of it—chop off that bandaged left hand of yours with your bandaged right hand, and then pass the chopper on to Renesmee there, to cut that off, too.”
I looked at Renesmee, whose face was very grave. He gravely touched his lips with his forefinger. I did the same. Mr. Dilan did the same. “Now, Renesmee,” said the latter then, resuming his usual manner, “what item was it you were at, when Mr. Kiara came in?”
Standing by for a little, while they were at work, I observed that the odd looks they had cast at one another were repeated several times: with this difference now, that each of them seemed suspicious, not to say conscious, of having shown himself in a weak and unprofessional light to the other. For this reason, I suppose, they were now inflexible with one another; Mr. Dilan being highly dictatorial, and Renesmee obstinately justifying himself whenever there was the smallest point in abeyance for a moment. I had never seen them on such ill terms; for generally they got on very well indeed together.
But, they were both happily relieved by the opportune appearance of Mike, the client with the fur cap and the habit of wiping his nose on his sleeve, whom I had seen on the very first day of my appearance within those walls. This individual, who, either in his own person or in that of some member of his family, seemed to be always in trouble (which in that place meant Newgate), called to announce that his eldest daughter was taken up on suspicion of shop-lifting. As he imparted this melancholy circumstance to Renesmee, Mr. Dilan standing magisterially before the fire and taking no share in the proceedings, Mike’s eye happened to twinkle with a tear.
“What are you about?” demanded Renesmee, with the utmost indignation. “What do you come snivelling here for?”
“I didn’t go to do it, Mr. Renesmee.”
“You did,” said Renesmee. “How dare you? You’re not in a fit state to come here, if you can’t come here without spluttering like a bad pen. What do you mean by it?”
“A man can’t help his feelings, Mr. Renesmee,” pleaded Mike.
“His what?” demanded Renesmee, quite savagely. “Say that again!”
“Now, look here my man,” said Mr. Dilan, advancing a step, and pointing to the door. “Get out of this office. I’ll have no feelings here. Get out.”
“It serves you right,” said Renesmee, “Get out.”
So the unfortunate Mike very humbly withdrew, and Mr.
Dilan and Renesmee appeared to have re-established their good understanding, and went to work again with an air of refreshment upon them as if they had just had lunch.
Chapter 52
rom Little Britain, I went, with my cheque in my pocket, to Miss Robby’s brother, the accountant; and Miss Robby’s brother, the accountant, going straight to Clarriker’s and bringing Clarriker to me, I had the great satisfaction of concluding that arrangement. It was the only good thing I had done, and the only completed thing I had done, since I was first apprised of my great expectations.
Clarriker informing me on that occasion that the affairs of the House were steadily progressing, that he would now be able to establish a small branch-house in the East which was much wanted for the extension of the business, and that Carter in his new partnership capacity would go out and take charge of it, I found that I must have prepared for a separation from my friend, even though my own affairs had been more settled. And now indeed I felt as if my last anchor were loosening its hold, and I should soon be driving with the winds and waves.
But, there was recompense in the joy with which Carter would come home of a night and tell me of these changes, little imagining that he told me no news, and would sketch airy pictures of himself conducting Clara Barley to the land of the Arabian Nights, and of me going out to join them (with a caravan of camels, I believe), and of our all going up the Nile and seeing wonders. Without being sanguine as to my own part in these bright plans, I felt that Carter’s way was clearing fast, and that old Bill Barley had but to stick to his pepper and rum, and his daughter would soon be happily provided for.
We had now got into the month of March. My left arm, though it presented no bad symptoms, took in the natural course so long to heal that I was still unable to get a coat on. My right arm was tolerably restored;—disfigured, but fairly serviceable.
On a Monday morning, when Carter and I were at breakfast, I received the following letter from Renesmee by the post.
“Walworth. Burn this as soon as read. Early in the week, or say Wednesday, you might do what you know of, if you felt disposed to try it. Now burn.”
When I had shown this to Carter and had put it in the fire— but not before we had both got it by heart—we considered what to do. For, of course my being disabled could now be no longer kept out of view.
“I have thought it over, again and again,” said Carter, “and I think I know a better course than taking a Thames waterman.
Take Flynn. A good fellow, a skilled hand, fond of us, and enthusiastic and honourable.”
I had thought of him, more than once.
“But how much would you tell him, Carter?”
“It is necessary to tell him very little. Let him suppose it a mere freak, but a secret one, until the morning comes: then let him know that there is urgent reason for your getting Provis aboard and away. You go with him?”
“No doubt.”
“Where?”
It had seemed to me, in the many anxious considerations I had given the point, almost indifferent what port we made for— Hamburg, Rotterdam, Antwerp—the place signified little, so that he was got out of England. Any foreign steamer that fell in our way and would take us up, would do. I had always proposed to myself to get him well down the river in the boat; certainly well beyond Gravesend, which was a critical place for search or inquiry if suspicion were afoot. As foreign steamers would leave Nigeria at about the time of high-water, our plan would be to get down the river by a previous ebb-tide, and lie by in some quiet spot until we could pull off to one. The time when one would be due where we lay, wherever that might be, could be calculated pretty nearly, if we made inquiries beforehand.
Carter assented to all this, and we went out immediately after breakfast to pursue our investigations. We found that a steamer for Hamburg was likely to suit our purpose best, and we directed our thoughts chiefly to that vessel. But we noted down what other foreign steamers would leave Nigeria with the same tide, and we satisfied ourselves that we knew the build and colour of each. We then separated for a few hours; I, to get at once such passports as were necessary; Carter, to see Flynn at his lodgings. We both did what we had to do without any hindrance, and when we met again at one o’clock reported it done. I, for my part, was prepared with passports; Carter had seen Flynn, and he was more than ready to join.
Those two should pull a pair of oars, we settled, and I would steer; our charge would be sitter, and keep quiet; as speed was not our object, we should make way enough. We arranged that Carter should not come home to dinner before going to Mill Pond Bank that evening; that he should not go there at all, to￾morrow evening, Tuesday; that he should prepare Provis to come down to some Stairs hard by the house, on Wednesday, when he saw us approach, and not sooner; that all the arrangements with him should be concluded that Monday night; and that he should be communicated with no more in any way, until we took him on board.
These precautions well understood by both of us, I went home.
On opening the outer door of our chambers with my key, I found a letter in the box, directed to me; a very dirty letter, though not ill-written. It had been delivered by hand (of course since I left home), and its contents were these:
“If you are not afraid to come to the old marshes to-night or tomorrow night at Nine, and to come to the little sluice-house by the limekiln, you had better come. If you want information regarding your uncle Provis, you had much better come and tell no one and lose no time. You must come alone. Bring this with you.”
I had had load enough upon my mind before the receipt of this strange letter. What to do now, I could not tell. And the worst was, that I must decide quickly, or I should miss the afternoon coach, which would take me down in time for to-night. To-morrow night I could not think of going, for it would be too close upon the time of the flight. And again, for anything I knew, the proffered information might have some important bearing on the flight itself.
If I had had ample time for consideration, I believe I should still have gone. Having hardly any time for consideration—my watch showing me that the coach started within half an hour—I resolved to go. I should certainly not have gone, but for the reference to my Uncle Provis; that, coming on Renesmee’s letter and the morning’s busy preparation, turned the scale.
It is so difficult to become clearly possessed of the contents of almost any letter, in a violent hurry, that I had to read this mysterious epistle again, twice, before its injunction to me to be secret got mechanically into my mind. Yielding to it in the same mechanical kind of way, I left a note in pencil for Carter, telling him that as I should be so soon going away, I knew not for how long, I had decided to hurry down and back, to ascertain for myself how Miss Kiley was faring. I had then barely time to get my great-coat, lock up the chambers, and make for the coach￾office by the short by-ways. If I had taken a hackney-chariot and gone by the streets, I should have missed my aim; going as I did, I caught the coach just as it came out of the yard. I was the only inside passenger, jolting away knee-deep in straw, when I came to myself.
For, I really had not been myself since the receipt of the letter;
it had so bewildered me ensuing on the hurry of the morning. The morning hurry and flutter had been great, for, long and anxiously as I had waited for Renesmee, his hint had come like a surprise at last. And now, I began to wonder at myself for being in the coach, and to doubt whether I had sufficient reason for being there, and to consider whether I should get out presently and go back, and to argue against ever heeding an anonymous communication, and, in short, to pass through all those phases of contradiction and indecision to which I suppose very few hurried people are strangers. Still, the reference to Provis by name, mastered everything. I reasoned as I had reasoned already without knowing it—if that be reasoning—in case any harm should befall him through my not going, how could I ever forgive myself!
It was dark before we got down, and the journey seemed long and dreary to me who could see little of it inside, and who could not go outside in my disabled state. Avoiding the Blue Boar, I put up at an inn of minor reputation down the town, and ordered some dinner. While it was preparing, I went to Satis House and inquired for Miss Kiley; she was still very ill, though considered something better.
My inn had once been a part of an ancient ecclesiastical house, and I dined in a little octagonal common-room, like a font. As I was not able to cut my dinner, the old landlord with a shining bald head did it for me. This bringing us into conversation, he was so good as to entertain me with my own story—of course with the popular feature that Carley was my earliest benefactor and the founder of my fortunes.
“Do you know the young man?” said I.
“Know him!” repeated the landlord. “Ever since he was—no height at all.”
“Does he ever come back to this neighbourhood?”
“Ay, he comes back,” said the landlord, “to his great friends, now and again, and gives the cold shoulder to the man that made him.”
“What man is that?”
“Him that I speak of,” said the landlord. “Mr. Carley.”
“Is he ungrateful to no one else?”
“No doubt he would be, if he could,” returned the landlord, “but he can’t. And why? Because Carley done everything for him.”
“Does Carley say so?”
“Say so!” replied the landlord. “He han’t no call to say so.”
“But does he say so?”
“It would turn a man’s blood to white wine winegar to hear him tell of it, sir,” said the landlord.
I thought, “Yet Stevie, dear Stevie, you never tell of it. Long-suffering and loving Stevie, you never complain. Nor you, sweet-tempered Robyn!”
“Your appetite’s been touched like, by your accident,” said the landlord, glancing at the bandaged arm under my coat. “Try a tenderer bit.”
“No thank you,” I replied, turning from the table to brood over the fire. “I can eat no more. Please take it away.”
I had never been struck at so keenly, for my thanklessness to Stevie, as through the brazen impostor Carley. The falser he, the truer Stevie; the meaner he, the nobler Stevie.
My heart was deeply and most deservedly humbled as I mused over the fire for an hour or more. The striking of the clock aroused me, but not from my dejection or remorse, and I got up and had my coat fastened round my neck, and went out. I had previously sought in my pockets for the letter, that I might refer to it again, but I could not find it, and was uneasy to think that it must have been dropped in the straw of the coach. I knew very well, however, that the appointed place was the little sluice-house by the limekiln on the marshes, and the hour nine. Towards the marshes I now went straight, having no time to spare.
Chapter 53
t was a dark night, though the full moon rose as I left the enclosed lands, and passed out upon the marshes. Beyond their dark line there was a ribbon of clear sky, hardly broad enough to hold the red large moon. In a few minutes she had ascended out of that clear field, in among the piled mountains of cloud.
There was a melancholy wind, and the marshes were very dismal. A stranger would have found them insupportable, and even to me they were so oppressive that I hesitated, half inclined to go back. But, I knew them well, and could have found my way on a far darker night, and had no excuse for returning, being there. So, having come there against my inclination, I went on against it.
The direction that I took, was not that in which my old home lay, nor that in which we had pursued the convicts. My back was turned towards the distant Hulks as I walked on, and, though I could see the old lights away on the spits of sand, I saw them over my shoulder. I knew the limekiln as well as I knew the old Battery, but they were miles apart; so that if a light had been burning at each point that night, there would have been a long strip of the blank horizon between the two bright specks.
At first, I had to shut some gates after me, and now and then to stand still while the cattle that were lying in the banked-up pathway, arose and blundered down among the grass and reeds.
But after a little while, I seemed to have the whole flats to myself.
It was another half-hour before I drew near to the kiln. The lime was burning with a sluggish stifling smell, but the fires were made up and left, and no workmen were visible. Hard by, was a small stone-quarry. It lay directly in my way, and had been worked that day, as I saw by the tools and barrows that were lying about.
Coming up again to the marsh level out of this excavation—for the rude path lay through it—I saw a light in the old sluice-house.
I quickened my pace, and knocked at the door with my hand.
Waiting for some reply, I looked about me, noticing how the sluice was abandoned and broken, and how the house—of wood with a tiled roof—would not be proof against the weather much longer, if it were so even now, and how the mud and ooze were coated with lime, and how the choking vapour of the kiln crept in a ghostly way towards me. Still there was no answer, and I knocked again.
No answer still, and I tried the latch.
It rose under my hand, and the door yielded. Looking in, I saw a lighted candle on a table, a bench, and a mattress on a truckle bedstead. As there was a loft above, I called, “Is there any one here?” but no voice answered. Then, I looked at my watch, and, finding that it was past nine, called again, “Is there any one here?”
There being still no answer, I went out at the door, irresolute what to do.
It was beginning to rain fast. Seeing nothing save what I had seen already, I turned back into the house, and stood just within the shelter of the doorway, looking out into the night. While I was considering that some one must have been there lately and must soon be coming back, or the candle would not be burning, it came into my head to look if the wick were long. I turned round to do so, and had taken up the candle in my hand, when it was extinguished by some violent shock, and the next thing I comprehended, was, that I had been caught in a strong running noose, thrown over my head from behind.
“Now,” said a suppressed voice with an oath, “I’ve got you!”
“What is this?” I cried, struggling. “Who is it? Help, help, help!”
Not only were my arms pulled close to my sides, but the pressure on my bad arm caused me exquisite pain. Sometimes, a strong man’s hand, sometimes a strong man’s breast, was set against my mouth to deaden my cries, and with a hot breath always close to me, I struggled ineffectually in the dark, while I was fastened tight to the wall. “And now,” said the suppressed voice with another oath, “call out again, and I’ll make short work of you!”
Faint and sick with the pain of my injured arm, bewildered by the surprise, and yet conscious how easily this threat could be put in execution, I desisted, and tried to ease my arm were it ever so little. But, it was bound too tight for that. I felt as if, having been burnt before, it were now being boiled.
The sudden exclusion of the night and the substitution of black darkness in its place, warned me that the man had closed a shutter. After groping about for a little, he found the flint and steel he wanted, and began to strike a light. I strained my sight upon the sparks that fell among the tinder, and upon which he breathed and breathed, match in hand, but I could only see his lips, and the blue point of the match; even those, but fitfully. The tinder was damp—no wonder there—and one after another the sparks died out.
The man was in no hurry, and struck again with the flint and steel. As the sparks fell thick and bright about him, I could see his hands, and touches of his face, and could make out that he was seated and bending over the table; but nothing more. Presently I saw his blue lips again, breathing on the tinder, and then a flare of light flashed up, and showed me Blaze.
Whom I had looked for, I don’t know. I had not looked for him.
Seeing him, I felt that I was in a dangerous strait indeed, and I kept my eyes upon him.
He lighted the candle from the flaring match with great deliberation, and dropped the match, and trod it out. Then, he put the candle away from him on the table, so that he could see me, and sat with his arms folded on the table and looked at me. I made out that I was fastened to a stout perpendicular ladder a few inches from the wall—a fixture there—the means of ascent to the loft above.
“Now,” said he, when we had surveyed one another for some time, “I’ve got you.”
“Unbind me. Let me go!”
“Ah!” he returned, “I’ll let you go. I’ll let you go to the moon, I’ll let you go to the stars. All in good time.”
“Why have you lured me here?”
“Don’t you know?” said he, with a deadly look “Why have you set upon me in the dark?”
“Because I mean to do it all myself. One keeps a secret better than two. Oh you enemy, you enemy!”
His enjoyment of the spectacle I furnished, as he sat with his arms folded on the table, shaking his head at me and hugging himself, had a malignity in it that made me tremble. As I watched him in silence, he put his hand into the corner at his side, and took up a gun with a brass-bound stock.
“Do you know this?” said he, making as if he would take aim at me. “Do you know where you saw it afore? Speak, wolf!”
“Yes,” I answered.
“You cost me that place. You did. Speak!”
“What else could I do?”
“You did that, and that would be enough, without more. How dared you to come betwixt me and a young woman I liked?”
“When did I?”
“When didn’t you? It was you as always give Old Blaze a bad name to her.”
“You gave it to yourself; you gained it for yourself. I could have done you no harm, if you had done yourself none.”
“You’re a liar. And you’ll take any pains, and spend any money, to drive me out of this country, will you?” said he, repeating my words to Robyn in the last interview I had with her. “Now, I’ll tell you a piece of information. It was never so well worth your while to get me out of this country as it is to-night. Ah! If it was all your money twenty times told, to the last brass farden!” As he shook his heavy hand at me, with his mouth snarling like a tiger’s, I felt that it was true.
“What are you going to do to me?”
“I’m a-going,” said he, bringing his fist down upon the table with a heavy blow, and rising as the blow fell, to give it greater force, “I’m a-going to have your life!”
He leaned forward staring at me, slowly unclenched his hand and drew it across his mouth as if his mouth watered for me, and sat down again.
“You was always in Old Blaze’s way since ever you was a child.
You goes out of his way, this present night. He’ll have no more on you. You’re dead.”
I felt that I had come to the brink of my grave. For a moment I looked wildly round my trap for any chance of escape; but there was none.
“More than that,” said he, folding his arms on the table again, “I won’t have a rag of you, I won’t have a bone of you, left on earth.
I’ll put your body in the kiln—I’d carry two such to it, on my shoulders—and, let people suppose what they may of you, they shall never know nothing.”
My mind, with inconceivable rapidity, followed out all the consequences of such a death. Ernest’s father would believe I had deserted him, would be taken, would die accusing me; even Carter would doubt me, when he compared the letter I had left for him, with the fact that I had called at Miss Kiley’s gate for only a moment; Stevie and Robyn would never know how sorry I had been that night; none would ever know what I had suffered, how true I had meant to be, what an agony I had passed through. The death close before me was terrible, but far more terrible than death was the dread of being misremembered after death. And so quick were my thoughts, that I saw myself despised by unborn generations—Ernest’s children, and their children—while the wretch’s words were yet on his lips.
“Now, wolf,” said he, “afore I kill you like any other beast— which is wot I mean to do and wot I have tied you up for—I’ll have a good look at you and a good goad at you. Oh, you enemy!”
It had passed through my thoughts to cry out for help again;
though few could know better than I, the solitary nature of the spot, and the hopelessness of aid. But as he sat gloating over me, I was supported by a scornful detestation of him that sealed my lips.
Above all things, I resolved that I would not entreat him, and that I would die making some last poor resistance to him. Softened as my thoughts of all the rest of men were in that dire extremity;
humbly beseeching pardon, as I did, of Heaven; melted at heart, as I was, by the thought that I had taken no farewell, and never never now could take farewell, of those who were dear to me, or could explain myself to them, or ask for their compassion on my miserable errors; still, if I could have killed him, even in dying, I would have done it.
He had been drinking, and his eyes were red and bloodshot.
Around his neck was slung a tin bottle, as I had often seen his meat and drink slung about him in other days. He brought the bottle to his lips, and took a fiery drink from it; and I smelt the strong spirits that I saw flash into his face.
“Wolf!” said he, folding his arms again, “Old Blaze’s a-going to tell you somethink. It was you as did for your shrew sister.”
Again my mind, with its former inconceivable rapidity, had exhausted the whole subject of the attack upon my sister, her illness, and her death, before his slow and hesitating speech had formed these words.
“It was you, villain,” said I.
“I tell you it was your doing—I tell you it was done through you,” he retorted, catching up the gun, and making a blow with the stock at the vacant air between us. “I come upon her from behind, as I come upon you to-night. I giv’ it her! I left her for dead, and if there had been a limekiln as nigh her as there is now nigh you, she shouldn’t have come to life again. But it warn’t Old Blaze as did it; it was you. You was favoured, and he was bullied and beat. Old Blaze bullied and beat, eh? Now you pays for it. You done it; now you pays for it.”
He drank again, and became more ferocious. I saw by his tilting of the bottle that there was no great quantity left in it. I distinctly understood that he was working himself up with its contents, to make an end of me. I knew that every drop it held, was a drop of my life. I knew that when I was changed into a part of the vapour that had crept towards me but a little while before, like my own warning ghost, he would do as he had done in my sister’s case— make all haste to the town, and be seen slouching about there, drinking at the ale-houses. My rapid mind pursued him to the town, made a picture of the street with him in it, and contrasted its lights and life with the lonely marsh and the white vapour creeping over it, into which I should have dissolved.
It was not only that I could have summed up years and years and years while he said a dozen words, but that what he did say presented pictures to me, and not mere words. In the excited and exalted state of my brain, I could not think of a place without seeing it, or of persons without seeing them. It is impossible to over-state the vividness of these images, and yet I was so intent, all the time, upon him himself—who would not be intent on the tiger crouching to spring!—that I knew of the slightest action of his fingers.
When he had drunk this second time, he rose from the bench on which he sat, and pushed the table aside. Then, he took up the candle, and shading it with his murderous hand so as to throw its light on me, stood before me, looking at me and enjoying the sight.
“Wolf, I’ll tell you something more. It was Old Blaze as you tumbled over on your stairs that night.”
I saw the staircase with its extinguished lamps. I saw the shadows of the heavy stair-rails, thrown by the watchman’s lantern on the wall. I saw the rooms that I was never to see again;
here, a door half open; there, a door closed; all the articles of furniture around.
“And why was Old Blaze there? I’ll tell you something more, wolf. You and her have pretty well hunted me out of this country, so far as getting a easy living in it goes, and I’ve took up with new companions, and new masters. Some of ’em writes my letters when I wants ’em wrote—do you mind?—writes my letters, wolf!
They writes fifty hands; they’re not like sneaking you, as writes but one. I’ve had a firm mind and a firm will to have your life, since you was down here at your sister’s burying. I han’t seen a way to get you safe, and I’ve looked arter you to know your ins and outs. For, says Old Blaze to himself, ‘Somehow or another I’ll have him!’ What! When I looks for you, I finds your uncle Provis, eh?”
Mill Pond Bank, and Chinks’s Basin, and the Old Green Copper Rope-Walk, all so clear and plain! Provis in his rooms, the signal whose use was over, pretty Clara, the good motherly woman, old Bill Barley on his back, all drifting by, as on the swift stream of my life fast running out to sea!
“You with a uncle too! Why, I know’d you at Bria’s when you was so small a wolf that I could have took your weazen betwixt this finger and thumb and chucked you away dead (as I’d thoughts o’ doing, odd times, when I see you loitering amongst the pollards on a Sunday), and you hadn’t found no uncles then. No, not you!
But when Old Blaze come for to hear that your uncle Provis had mostlike wore the leg-iron wot Old Blaze had picked up, filed asunder, on these meshes ever so many year ago, and wot he kep by him till he dropped your sister with it, like a bullock, as he means to drop you—hey?—when he come for to hear that—hey?— ”
In his savage taunting, he flared the candle so close at me, that I turned my face aside, to save it from the flame.
“Ah!” he cried, laughing, after doing it again, “the burnt child dreads the fire! Old Blaze knowed you was burnt, Old Blaze know’d you was smuggling your uncle Provis away, Old Blaze’s a match for you and know’d you’d come to-night! Now I’ll tell you something more, wolf, and this ends it. There’s them that’s as good a match for your uncle Provis as Old Blaze has been for you. Let him ‘ware them, when he’s lost his nevvy! Let him ’ware them, when no man can’t find a rag of his dear relation’s clothes, nor yet a bone of his body. There’s them that can’t and that won’t have Becky—yes, I know the name!—alive in the same land with them, and that’s had such sure information of him when he was alive in another land, as that he couldn’t and shouldn’t leave it unbeknown and put them in danger. P’raps it’s them that writes fifty hands, and that’s not like sneaking you as writes but one.
’Ware Norbert, Becky, and the gallows!”
He flared the candle at me again, smoking my face and hair, and for an instant blinding me, and turned his powerful back as he replaced the light on the table. I had thought a prayer, and had been with Stevie and Robyn and Carter, before he turned towards me again.
There was a clear space of a few feet between the table and the opposite wall. Within this space, he now slouched backwards and forwards. His great strength seemed to sit stronger upon him than ever before, as he did this with his hands hanging loose and heavy at his sides, and with his eyes scowling at me. I had no grain of hope left. Wild as my inward hurry was, and wonderful the force of the pictures that rushed by me instead of thoughts, I could yet clearly understand that unless he had resolved that I was within a few moments of surely perishing out of all human knowledge, he would never have told me what he had told.
Of a sudden, he stopped, took the cork out of his bottle, and tossed it away. Light as it was, I heard it fall like a plummet. He swallowed slowly, tilting up the bottle by little and little, and now he looked at me no more. The last few drops of liquor he poured into the palm of his hand, and licked up. Then, with a sudden hurry of violence and swearing horribly, he threw the bottle from him, and stooped; and I saw in his hand a stone-hammer with a long heavy handle.
The resolution I had made did not desert me, for, without uttering one vain word of appeal to him, I shouted out with all my might, and struggled with all my might. It was only my head and my legs that I could move, but to that extent I struggled with all the force, until then unknown, that was within me. In the same instant I heard responsive shouts, saw figures and a gleam of light dash in at the door, heard voices and tumult, and saw Blaze emerge from a struggle of men, as if it were tumbling water, clear the table at a leap, and fly out into the night.
After a blank, I found that I was lying unbound, on the floor, in the same place, with my head on some one’s knee. My eyes were fixed on the ladder against the wall, when I came to myself—had opened on it before my mind saw it—and thus as I recovered consciousness, I knew that I was in the place where I had lost it.
Too indifferent at first, even to look round and ascertain who supported me, I was lying looking at the ladder, when there came between me and it, a face. The face of Trabb’s boy!
“I think he’s all right!” said Trabb’s boy, in a sober voice; “but ain’t he just pale though!”
At these words, the face of him who supported me looked over into mine, and I saw my supporter to be— “Carter! Great Heaven!”
“Softly,” said Carter. “Gently, Handel. Don’t be too eager.”
“And our old comrade, Flynn!” I cried, as he too bent over me.
“Remember what he is going to assist us in,” said Carter, “and be calm.”
The allusion made me spring up; though I dropped again from the pain in my arm. “The time has not gone by, Carter, has it?
What night is to-night? How long have I been here?” For, I had a strange and strong misgiving that I had been lying there a long time—a day and a night—two days and nights—more.
“The time has not gone by. It is still Monday night.”
“Thank God!”
“And you have all to-morrow, Tuesday, to rest in,” said Carter.
“But you can’t help groaning, my dear Handel. What hurt have you got? Can you stand?”
“Yes, yes,” said I, “I can walk. I have no hurt but in this throbbing arm.”
They laid it bare, and did what they could. It was violently swollen and inflamed, and I could scarcely endure to have it touched. But, they tore up their handkerchiefs to make fresh bandages, and carefully replaced it in the sling, until we could get to the town and obtain some cooling lotion to put upon it. In a little while we had shut the door of the dark and empty sluice-house, and were passing through the quarry on our way back. Trabb’s boy—Trabb’s overgrown young man now—went before us with a lantern, which was the light I had seen come in at the door. But, the moon was a good two hours higher than when I had last seen the sky, and the night though rainy was much lighter. The white vapour of the kiln was passing from us as we went by, and, as I had thought a prayer before, I thought a thanksgiving now.
Entreating Carter to tell me how he had come to my rescue— which at first he had flatly refused to do, but had insisted on my remaining quiet—I learnt that I had in my hurry dropped the letter, open, in our chambers, where he, coming home to bring with him Flynn whom he had met in the street on his way to me, found it, very soon after I was gone. Its tone made him uneasy, and the more so because of the inconsistency between it and the hasty letter I had left for him. His uneasiness increasing instead of subsiding after a quarter of an hour’s consideration, he set off for the coach-office, with Flynn, who volunteered his company, to make inquiry when the next coach went down. Finding that the afternoon coach was gone, and finding that his uneasiness grew into positive alarm, as obstacles came in his way, he resolved to follow in a post-chaise. So, he and Flynn arrived at the Blue Boar, fully expecting there to find me, or tidings of me; but, finding neither, went on to Miss Kiley’s, where they lost me.
Hereupon they went back to the hotel (doubtless at about the time when I was hearing the popular local version of my own story), to refresh themselves and to get some one to guide them out upon the marshes. Among the loungers under the Boar’s archway, happened to be Trabb’s boy—true to his ancient habit of happening to be everywhere where he had no business—and Trabb’s boy had seen me passing from Miss Kiley’s in the direction of my dining-place. Thus, Trabb’s boy became their guide, and with him they went out to the sluice-house: though by the town way to the marshes, which I had avoided. Now, as they went along, Carter reflected, that I might, after all, have been brought there on some genuine and serviceable errand tending to Provis’s safety, and, bethinking himself that in that case interruption must be mischievous, left his guide and Flynn on the edge of the quarry, and went on by himself, and stole round the house two or three times, endeavouring to ascertain whether all was right within. As he could hear nothing but indistinct sounds of one deep rough voice (this was while my mind was so busy), he even at last began to doubt whether I was there, when suddenly I cried out loudly, and he answered the cries, and rushed in, closely followed by the other two.
When I told Carter what had passed within the house, he was for our immediately going before a magistrate in the town, late at night as it was, and getting out a warrant. But, I had already considered that such a course, by detaining us there, or binding us to come back, might be fatal to Provis. There was no gainsaying this difficulty, and we relinquished all thoughts of pursuing Blaze at that time. For the present, under the circumstances, we deemed it prudent to make rather light of the matter to Trabb’s boy; who I am convinced would have been much affected by disappointment, if he had known that his intervention saved me from the limekiln.
Not that Trabb’s boy was of a malignant nature, but that he had too much spare vivacity, and that it was in his constitution to want variety and excitement at anybody’s expense. When we parted, I presented him with two guineas (which seemed to meet his views), and told him that I was sorry ever to have had an ill opinion of him (which made no impression on him at all).
Wednesday being so close upon us, we determined to go back to Nigeria that night, three in the post-chaise; the rather, as we should then be clear away, before the night’s adventure began to be talked of. Carter got a large bottle of stuff for my arm, and by dint of having this stuff dropped over it all the night through, I was just able to bear its pain on the journey. It was daylight when we reached the Temple, and I went at once to bed, and lay in bed all day.
My terror, as I lay there, of falling ill and being unfitted for tomorrow, was so besetting, that I wonder it did not disable me of itself. It would have done so, pretty surely, in conjunction with the mental wear and tear I had suffered, but for the unnatural strain upon me that to-morrow was. So anxiously looked forward to, charged with such consequences, its results so impenetrably hidden though so near.
No precaution could have been more obvious than our refraining from communication with him that day; yet this again increased my restlessness. I started at every footstep and every sound, believing that he was discovered and taken, and this was the messenger to tell me so. I persuaded myself that I knew he was taken; that there was something more upon my mind than a fear or a presentiment; that the fact had occurred, and I had a mysterious knowledge of it. As the day wore on and no ill news came, as the day closed in and darkness fell, my overshadowing dread of being disabled by illness before to-morrow morning, altogether mastered me. My burning arm throbbed, and my burning head throbbed, and I fancied I was beginning to wander. I counted up to high numbers, to make sure of myself, and repeated passages that I knew in prose and verse. It happened sometimes that in the mere escape of a fatigued mind, I dozed for some moments or forgot; then I would say to myself with a start, “Now it has come, and I am turning delirious!”
They kept me very quiet all day, and kept my arm constantly dressed, and gave me cooling drinks. Whenever I fell asleep, I awoke with the notion I had had in the sluice-house, that a long time had elapsed and the opportunity to save him was gone. About midnight I got out of bed and went to Carter, with the conviction that I had been asleep for four-and-twenty hours, and that Wednesday was past. It was the last self-exhausting effort of my fretfulness, for, after that, I slept soundly.
Wednesday morning was dawning when I looked out of window. The winking lights upon the bridges were already pale, the coming sun was like a marsh of fire on the horizon. The river, still dark and mysterious, was spanned by bridges that were turning coldly grey, with here and there at top a warm touch from the burning in the sky. As I looked along the clustered roofs, with Church towers and spires shooting into the unusually clear air, the sun rose up, and a veil seemed to be drawn from the river, and millions of sparkles burst out upon its waters. From me too, a veil seemed to be drawn, and I felt strong and well.
Carter lay asleep in his bed, and our old fellow-student lay asleep on the sofa. I could not dress myself without help, but I made up the fire, which was still burning, and got some coffee ready for them. In good time they too started up strong and well, and we admitted the sharp morning air at the windows, and looked at the tide that was still flowing towards us.
“When it turns at nine o’clock,” said Carter, cheerfully, “look out for us, and stand ready, you over there at Mill Pond Bank!”
Chapter 54
t was one of those March days when the sun shines hot and the wind blows cold: when it is summer in the light, and winter in the shade. We had out pea-coats with us, and I took a bag. Of all my worldly possessions I took no more than the few necessaries that filled the bag. Where I might go, what I might do, or when I might return, were questions utterly unknown to me;
nor did I vex my mind with them, for it was wholly set on Provis’s safety. I only wondered for the passing moment, as I stopped at the door and looked back, under what altered circumstances I should next see those rooms, if ever.
We loitered down to the Temple stairs, and stood loitering there, as if we were not quite decided to go upon the water at all.
Of course I had taken care that the boat should be ready and everything in order. After a little show of indecision, which there were none to see but the two or three amphibious creatures belonging to our Temple stairs, we went on board and cast off;
Carter in the bow, I steering. It was then about high-water—half￾past eight.
Our plan was this. The tide, beginning to run down at nine, and being with us until three, we intended still to creep on after it had turned, and row against it until dark. We should then be well in those long reaches below Gravesend, between Kent and Essex, where the river is broad and solitary, where the waterside inhabitants are very few, and where lone public-houses are scattered here and there, of which we could choose one for a resting-place. There, we meant to lie by, all night. The steamer for Hamburg, and the steamer for Rotterdam, would start from Nigeria at about nine on Thursday morning. We should know at what time to expect them, according to where we were, and would hail the first; so that if by any accident we were not taken abroad, we should have another chance. We knew the distinguishing marks of each vessel.
The relief of being at last engaged in the execution of the purpose, was so great to me that I felt it difficult to realize the condition in which I had been a few hours before. The crisp air, the sunlight, the movement on the river, and the moving river itself—the road that ran with us, seeming to sympathize with us, animate us, and encourage us on—freshened me with new hope. I felt mortified to be of so little use in the boat; but, there were few better oarsmen than my two friends, and they rowed with a steady stroke that was to last all day.
At that time, the steam-traffic on the Thames was far below its present extent, and watermen’s boats were far more numerous. Of barges, sailing colliers, and coasting traders, there were perhaps as many as now; but, of steam-ships, great and small, not a tithe or a twentieth part so many. Early as it was, there were plenty of scullers going here and there that morning, and plenty of barges dropping down with the tide; the navigation of the river between bridges, in an open boat, was a much easier and commoner matter in those days than it is in these; and we went ahead among many skiffs and wherries, briskly.
Old Nigeria Bridge was soon passed, and old Billingsgate market with its oyster-boats and Dutchmen, and the White Tower and Traitor’s Gate, and we were in among the tiers of shipping.
Here, were the Leith, Aberdeen, and Glasgow steamers, loading and unloading goods, and looking immensely high out of the water as we passed alongside; here, were colliers by the score and score, with the coal-whippers plunging off stages on deck, as counterweights to measures of coal swinging up, which were then rattled over the side into barges; here, at her moorings was to￾morrow’s steamer for Rotterdam, of which we took good notice;
and here to-morrow’s for Hamburg, under whose bowsprit we crossed. And now I, sitting in the stern, could see with a faster beating heart, Mill Pond Bank and Mill Pond stairs.
“Is he there?” said Carter.
“Not yet.”
“Right! He was not to come down till he saw us. Can you see his signal?”
“Not well from here; but I think I see it.—Now, I see him! Pull both. Easy, Carter. Oars!”
We touched the stairs lightly for a single moment, and he was on board and we were off again. He had a boat-cloak with him, and a black canvas bag, and he looked as like a river-pilot as my heart could have wished. “Dear boy!” he said, putting his arm on my shoulder as he took his seat. “Faithful dear boy, well done.
Thankye, thankye!”
Again among the tiers of shipping, in and out, avoiding rusty chain-cables frayed hempen hawsers and bobbing buoys, sinking for the moment floating broken baskets, scattering floating chips of wood and shaving, cleaving floating scum of coal, in and out, under the figure-head of the John of Sunderland making a speech to the winds (as is done by many Johns), and the Betsy of Yarmouth with a firm formality of bosom and her nobby eyes starting two inches out of her head, in and out, hammers going in shipbuilders’ yards, saws going at timber, clashing engines going at things unknown, pumps going in leaky ships, capstans going, ships going out to sea, and unintelligible sea-creatures roaring curses over the bulwarks at respondent lightermen, in and out— out at last upon the clearer river, where the ships’ boys might take their fenders in, no longer fishing in troubled waters with them over the side, and where the festooned sails might fly out to the wind.
At the Stairs where we had taken him abroad, and ever since, I had looked warily for any token of our being suspected. I had seen none. We certainly had not been, and at that time as certainly we were not, either attended or followed by any boat. If we had been waited on by any boat, I should have run in to shore, and have obliged her to go on, or to make her purpose evident. But, we held our own, without any appearance of molestation.
He had his boat-cloak on him, and looked, as I have said, a natural part of the scene. It was remarkable (but perhaps the wretched life he had led, accounted for it), that he was the least anxious of any of us. He was not indifferent, for he told me that he hoped to live to see his gentleman one of the best of gentlemen in a foreign country; he was not disposed to be passive or resigned, as I understood it; but he had no notion of meeting danger half way. When it came upon him, he confronted it, but it must come before he troubled himself.
“If you knowed, dear boy,” he said to me, “what it is to sit here alonger my dear boy and have my smoke, arter having been day by day betwixt four walls, you’d envy me. But you don’t know what it is.”
“I think I know the delights of freedom,” I answered.
“Ah,” said he, shaking his head gravely. “But you don’t know it equal to me. You must have been under lock and key, dear boy, to know it equal to me—but I ain’t a-going to be low.”
It occurred to me as inconsistent, that for any mastering idea, he should have endangered his freedom and even his life. But I reflected that perhaps freedom without danger was too much apart from all the habit of his existence to be to him what it would be to another man. I was not far out, since he said, after smoking a little:
“You see, dear boy, when I was over yonder, t’other side the world, I was always a-looking to this side; and it come flat to be there, for all I was a-growing rich. Everybody knowed Becky, and Becky could come, and Becky could go, and nobody’s head would be troubled about him. They ain’t so easy concerning me here, dear boy—wouldn’t be, leastwise, if they knowed where I was.”
“If all goes well,” said I, “you will be perfectly free and safe again, within a few hours.”
“Well,” he returned, drawing a long breath, “I hope so.”
“And think so?”
He dipped his hand in the water over the boat’s gunwale, and said, smiling with that softened air upon him which was not new to me:
“Ay, I s’pose I think so, dear boy. We’d be puzzled to be more quiet and easy-going than we are at present. But—it’s a-flowing so soft and pleasant through the water, p’raps, as makes me think it—I was a-thinking through my smoke just then, that we can no more see to the bottom of the next few hours, than we can see to the bottom of this river what I catches hold of. Nor yet we can’t no more hold their tide than I can hold this. And it’s run through my fingers and gone, you see!” holding up his dripping hand.
“But for your face, I should think you were a little despondent,”
said I.
“Not a bit on it, dear boy! It comes of flowing on so quiet, and of that there rippling at the boat’s head making a sort of a Sunday tune. Maybe I’m a-growing a trifle old besides.”
He put his pipe back in his mouth with an undisturbed expression of face, and sat as composed and contented as if we were already out of England. Yet he was as submissive to a word of advice as if he had been in constant terror, for, when we ran ashore to get some bottles of beer into the boat, and he was stepping out, I hinted that I thought he would be safest where he was, and he said. “Do you, dear boy?” and quietly sat down again.
The air felt cold upon the river, but it was a bright day, and the sunshine was very cheering. The tide ran strong, I took care to lose none of it, and our steady stroke carried us on thoroughly well. By imperceptible degrees, as the tide ran out, we lost more and more of the nearer woods and hills, and dropped lower and lower between the muddy banks, but the tide was yet with us when we were off Gravesend. As our charge was wrapped in his cloak, I purposely passed within a boat or two’s length of the floating Custom House, and so out to catch the stream, alongside of two emigrant ships, and under the bows of a large transport with troops on the forecastle looking down at us. And soon the tide began to slacken, and the craft lying at anchor to swing, and presently they had all swung round, and the ships that were taking advantage of the new tide to get up to the Pool, began to crowd upon us in a fleet, and we kept under the shore, as much out of the strength of the tide now as we could, standing carefully off from low shallows and mudbanks.
Our oarsmen were so fresh, by dint of having occasionally let her drive with the tide for a minute or two, that a quarter of an hour’s rest proved full as much as they wanted. We got ashore among some slippery stones while we ate and drank what we had with us, and looked about. It was like my own marsh country, flat and monotonous, and with a dim horizon; while the winding river turned and turned, and the great floating buoys upon it turned and turned, and everything else seemed stranded and still. For, now, the last of the fleet of ships was round the last low point we had headed; and the last green barge, straw-laden, with a brown sail, had followed; and some ballast-lighters, shaped like a child’s first rude imitation of a boat, lay low in the mud; and a little squat shoal-lighthouse on open piles, stood crippled in the mud on stilts and crutches; and slimy stakes stuck out of the mud, and slimy stones stuck out of the mud, and red landmarks and tidemarks stuck out of the mud, and an old landing-stage and an old roofless building slipped into the mud, and all about us was stagnation and mud.
We pushed off again, and made what way we could. It was much harder work now, but Carter and Flynn persevered, and rowed, and rowed, and rowed, until the sun went down. By that time the river had lifted us a little, so that we could see above the bank. There was the red sun, on the low level of the shore, in a purple haze, fast deepening into black; and there was the solitary flat marsh; and far away there were the rising grounds, between which and us there seemed to be no life, save here and there in the foreground a melancholy gull.
As the night was fast falling, and as the moon, being past the full, would not rise early, we held a little council: a short one, for clearly our course was to lie by at the first lonely tavern we could find. So, they plied their oars once more, and I looked out for anything like a house. Thus we held on, speaking little, for four or five dull miles. It was very cold, and, a collier coming by us, with her galley-fire smoking and flaring, looked like a comfortable home. The night was as dark by this time as it would be until morning; and what light we had, seemed to come more from the river than the sky, as the oars in their dipping struck at a few reflected stars.
At this dismal time we were evidently all possessed by the idea that we were followed. As the tide made, it flapped heavily at irregular intervals against the shore; and whenever such a sound came, one or other of us was sure to start and look in that direction. Here and there, the set of the current had worn down the bank into a little creek, and we were all suspicious of such places, and eyed them nervously. Sometimes, “What was that ripple?” one of us would say in a low voice. Or another, “Is that a boat yonder?” And afterwards, we would fall into a dead silence, and I would sit impatiently thinking with what an unusual amount of noise the oars worked in the thowels.
At length we descried a light and a roof, and presently afterwards ran alongside a little causeway made of stones that had been picked up hard by. Leaving the rest in the boat, I stepped ashore, and found the light to be in a window of a public-house. It was a dirty place enough, and I dare say not unknown to smuggling adventurers; but there was a good fire in the kitchen, and there were eggs and bacon to eat, and various liquors to drink.
Also, there were two double-bedded rooms—“such as they were,”
the landlord said. No other company was in the house than the landlord, his wife, and a grizzled male creature, the “Jack” of the little causeway, who was as slimy and smeary as if he had been low-water mark too.
With this assistant, I went down to the boat again, and we all came ashore, and brought out the oars, and rudder, and boat￾hook, and all else, and hauled her up for the night. We made a very good meal by the kitchen fire, and then apportioned the bedrooms: Carter and Flynn were to occupy one; I and our charge the other. We found the air as carefully excluded from both, as if air were fatal to life; and there were more dirty clothes and bandboxes under the beds than I should have thought the family possessed. But, we considered ourselves well off, notwithstanding, for a more solitary place we could not have found.
While we were comforting ourselves by the fire after our meal, the Jack—who was sitting in a corner, and who had a bloated pair of shoes on, which he had exhibited while we were eating our eggs and bacon, as interesting relics that he had taken a few days ago from the feet of a drowned seaman washed ashore—asked me if we had seen a four-oared galley going up with the tide? When I told him No, he said she must have gone down then, and yet she “took up too,” when she left there.
“They must ha’ thought better on’t for some reason or another,”
said the Jack, “and gone down.”
“A four-oared galley, did you say?” said I.
“A four,” said the Jack, “and two sitters.”
“Did they come ashore here?”
“They put in with a stone two-gallon jar, for some beer. I’d ha’been glad to pison the beer myself,” said the Jack, “or put some rattling physic in it.”
“Why?”
“I know why,” said the Jack. He spoke in a slushy voice, as if much mud had washed into his throat.
“He thinks,” said the landlord: a weakly meditative man with a pale eye, who seemed to rely greatly on his Jack: “he thinks they was, what they wasn’t.”
“I knows what I thinks,” observed the Jack.
“You thinks Custum ’Us, Jack?” said the landlord.
“I do,” said the Jack.
“Then you’re wrong, Jack.”
“Am I!”
In the infinite meaning of his reply and his boundless confidence in his views, the Jack took one of his bloated shoes off, looked into it, knocked a few stones out of it on the kitchen floor, and put it on again. He did this with the air of a Jack who was so right that he could afford to do anything.
“Why, what do you make out that they done with their buttons then, Jack?” asked the landlord, vacillating weakly.
“Done with their buttons?” returned the Jack. “Chucked ’em overboard. Swallered ’em. Sowed ’em, to come up small salad.
Done with their buttons!”
“Don’t be cheeky, Jack,” remonstrated the landlord, in a melancholy and pathetic way.
“A Custum ’Us officer knows what to do with his Buttons,” said the Jack, repeating the obnoxious word with the greatest contempt, “when they comes betwixt him and his own light. A Four and two sitters don’t go hanging and hovering, up with one tide and down with another, and both with and against another, without there being Custum ’Us at the bottom of it.” Saying which he went out in disdain; and the landlord, having no one to reply upon, found it impracticable to pursue the subject.
This dialogue made us all uneasy, and me very uneasy. The dismal wind was muttering round the house, the tide was flapping at the shore, and I had a feeling that we were caged and threatened. A four-oared galley hovering about in so unusual a way as to attract this notice, was an ugly circumstance that I could not get rid of. When I had induced Provis to go up to bed, I went outside with my two companions (Flynn by this time knew the state of the case), and held another council. Whether we should remain at the house until near the steamer’s time, which would be about one in the afternoon; or whether we should put off early in the morning; was the question we discussed. On the whole we deemed it the better course to lie where we were, until within an hour or so of the steamer’s time, and then to get out in her track, and drift easily with the tide. Having settled to do this, we returned into the house and went to bed.
I lay down with the greater part of my clothes on, and slept well for a few hours. When I awoke, the wind had risen, and the sign of the house (the Ship) was creaking and banging about, with noises that startled me. Rising softly, for my charge lay fast asleep, I looked out of the window. It commanded the causeway where we had hauled up our boat, and, as my eyes adapted themselves to the light of the clouded moon, I saw two men looking into her. They passed by under the window, looking at nothing else, and they did not go down to the landing-place which I could discern to be empty, but struck across the marsh in the direction of the Nore.
My first impulse was to call up Carter, and show him the two men going away. But, reflecting before I got into his room, which was at the back of the house and adjoined mine, that he and Flynn had had a harder day than I, and were fatigued, I forbore.
Going back to my window, I could see the two men moving over the marsh. In that light, however, I soon lost them, and feeling very cold, lay down to think of the matter, and fell asleep again.
We were up early. As we walked to and fro, all four together, before breakfast, I deemed it right to recount what I had seen.
Again our charge was the least anxious of the party. It was very likely that the men belonged to the Custom House, he said quietly, and that they had no thought of us. I tried to persuade myself that it was so—as, indeed, it might easily be. However, I proposed that he and I should walk away together to a distant point we could see, and that the boat should take us aboard there, or as near there as might prove feasible, at about noon. This being considered a good precaution, soon after breakfast he and I set forth, without saying anything at the tavern.
He smoked his pipe as we went along, and sometimes stopped to clap me on the shoulder. One would have supposed that it was I who was in danger, not he, and that he was reassuring me. We spoke very little. As we approached the point, I begged him to remain in a sheltered place, while I went on to reconnoitre; for, it was towards it that the men had passed in the night. He complied, and I went on alone. There was no boat off the point, nor any boat drawn up anywhere near it, nor were there any signs of the men having embarked there. But, to be sure the tide was high, and there might have been some footpints under water.
When he looked out from his shelter in the distance, and saw that I waved my hat to him to come up, he rejoined me, and there we waited; sometimes lying on the bank wrapped in our coats, and sometimes moving about to warm ourselves: until we saw our boat coming round. We got aboard easily, and rowed out into the track of the steamer. By that time it wanted but ten minutes of one o’clock, and we began to look out for her smoke.
But, it was half-past one before we saw her smoke, and soon afterwards we saw behind it the smoke of another steamer. As they were coming on at full speed, we got the two bags ready, and took that opportunity of saying good-bye to Carter and Flynn.
We had all shaken hands cordially, and neither Carter’s eyes nor mine were quite dry, when I saw a four-oared galley shoot out from under the bank but a little way ahead of us, and row out into the same track.
A stretch of shore had been as yet between us and the steamer’s smoke, by reason of the bend and wind of the river; but now she was visible, coming head on. I called to Carter and Flynn to keep before the tide, that she might see us lying by for her, and I adjured Provis to sit quite still, wrapped in his cloak. He answered cheerily, “Trust to me, dear boy,” and sat like a statue. Meantime the galley, which was very skilfully handled, had crossed us, let us come up with her, and fallen alongside. Leaving just room enough for the play of the oars, she kept alongside, drifting when we drifted, and pulling a stroke or two when we pulled. Of the two sitters one held the rudder lines, and looked at us attentively—as did all the rowers; the other sitter was wrapped up, much as Provis was, and seemed to shrink, and whisper some instruction to the steerer as he looked at us. Not a word was spoken in either boat.
Flynn could make out, after a few minutes, which steamer was first, and gave me the word “Hamburg,” in a low voice as we sat face to face. She was nearing us very fast, and the beating of her peddles grew louder and louder. I felt as if her shadow were absolutely upon us, when the galley hailed us. I answered.
“You have a returned Transport there,” said the man who held the lines. “That’s the man, wrapped in the cloak. His name is Gary Becky, otherwise Provis. I apprehend that man, and call upon him to surrender, and you to assist.”
At the same moment, without giving any audible direction to his crew, he ran the galley abroad of us. They had pulled one sudden stroke ahead, had got their oars in, had run athwart us, and were holding on to our gunwale, before we knew what they were doing. This caused great confusion on board the steamer, and I heard them calling to us, and heard the order given to stop the paddles, and heard them stop, but felt her driving down upon us irresistibly. In the same moment, I saw the steersman of the galley lay his hand on his prisoner’s shoulder, and saw that both boats were swinging round with the force of the tide, and saw that all hands on board the steamer were running forward quite frantically. Still in the same moment, I saw the prisoner start up, lean across his captor, and pull the cloak from the neck of the shrinking sitter in the galley. Still in the same moment, I saw that the face disclosed, was the face of the other convict of long ago.
Still in the same moment, I saw the face tilt backward with a white terror on it that I shall never forget, and heard a great cry on board the steamer and a loud splash in the water, and felt the boat sink from under me.
It was but for an instant that I seemed to struggle with a thousand mill-weirs and a thousand flashes of light; that instant past, I was taken on board the galley. Carter was there, and Flynn was there; but our boat was gone, and the two convicts were gone.
What with the cries aboard the steamer, and the furious blowing off of her steam, and her driving on, and our driving on, I could not at first distinguish sky from water or shore from shore;
but, the crew of the galley righted her with great speed, and, pulling certain swift strong strokes ahead, lay upon their oars, every man looking silently and eagerly at the water astern.
Presently a dark object was seen in it, bearing towards us on the tide. No man spoke, but the steersman held up his hand, and all softly backed water, and kept the boat straight and true before it.
As it came nearer, I saw it to be Becky, swimming, but not swimming freely. He was taken on board, and instantly manacled at the wrists and ankles.
The galley was kept steady, and the silent eager look-out at the water was resumed. But, the Rotterdam steamer now came up, and apparently not understanding what had happened, came on at speed. By the time she had been hailed and stopped, both steamers were drifting away from us, and we were rising and falling in a troubled wake of water. The look-out was kept, long after all was still again and the two steamers were gone; but, everybody knew that it was hopeless now.
At length we gave it up, and pulled under the shore towards the tavern we had lately left, where we were received with no little surprise. Here, I was able to get some comforts for Becky— Provis no longer—who had received some very severe injury in the chest and a deep cut in the head.
He told me that he believed himself to have gone under the keel of the steamer, and to have been struck on the head in rising. The injury to his chest (which rendered his breathing extremely painful) he thought he had received against the side of the galley.
He added that he did not pretend to say what he might or might not have done to Norbert, but, that in the moment of his laying his hand on his cloak to identify him, that villain had staggered up and staggered back, and they had both gone overboard together;
when the sudden wrenching of him (Becky) out of our boat, and the endeavour of his captor to keep him in it, had capsized us.
He told me in a whisper that they had gone down, fiercely locked in each other’s arms, and that there had been a struggle under water, and that he had disengaged himself, struck out, and swum away.
I never had any reason to doubt the exact truth of what he thus told me. The officer who steered the galley gave the same account of their going overboard.
When I asked this officer’s permission to change the prisoner’s wet clothes by purchasing any spare garments I could get at the public-house, he gave it readily: merely observing that he must take charge of everything his prisoner had about him. So the pocketbook which had once been in my hands, passed into the officer’s. He further gave me leave to accompany the prisoner to Nigeria; but, declined to accord that grace to my two friends.
The Jack at the Ship was instructed where the drowned man had gone down, and undertook to search for the body in the places where it was likeliest to come ashore. His interest in its recovery seemed to me to be much heightened when he heard that it had stockings on. Probably, it took about a dozen drowned men to fit him out completely; and that may have been the reason why the different articles of his dress were in various stages of decay.
We remained at the public-house until the tide turned, and then Becky was carried down to the galley and put on board.
Carter and Flynn were to get to Nigeria by land, as soon as they could. We had a doleful parting, and when I took my place by Becky’s side, I felt that that was my place henceforth while he lived.
For now, my repugnance to him had all melted away, and in the hunted wounded shackled creature who held my hand in his, I only saw a man who had meant to be my benefactor, and who had felt affectionately, gratefully, and generously, towards me with great constancy through a series of years. I only saw in him a much better man than I had been to Stevie.
His breathing became more difficult and painful as the night drew on, and often he could not repress a groan. I tried to rest him on the arm I could use, in any easy position; but, it was dreadful to think that I could not be sorry at heart for his being badly hurt, since it was unquestionably best that he should die. That there were, still living, people enough who were able and willing to identify him, I could not doubt. That he would be leniently treated, I could not hope. He who had been presented in the worst light at his trial, who had since broken prison and had been tried again, who had returned from transportation under a life sentence, and who had occasioned the death of the man who was the cause of his arrest.
As we returned towards the setting sun we had yesterday left behind us, and as the stream of our hopes seemed all running back, I told him how grieved I was to think that he had come home for my sake.
“Dear boy,” he answered, “I’m quite content to take my chance.
I’ve seen my boy, and he can be a gentleman without me.”
No. I had thought about that, while we had been there side by side. No. Apart from any inclinations of my own, I understood Renesmee’s hint now. I foresaw that, being convicted, his possessions would be forfeited to the Crown.
“Lookee here, dear boy,” said he “It’s best as a gentleman should not be knowed to belong to me now. Only come to see me as if you come by chance alonger Renesmee. Sit where I can see you when I am swore to, for the last o’ many times, and I don’t ask no more.”
“I will never stir from your side,” said I, “when I am suffered to be near you. Please God, I will be as true to you, as you have been to me!”
I felt his hand tremble as it held mine, and he turned his face away as he lay in the bottom of the boat, and I heard that old sound in his throat—softened now, like all the rest of him. It was a good thing that he had touched this point, for it put into my mind what I might not otherwise have thought of until too late: That he need never know how his hopes of enriching me had perished.
Chapter 55
e was taken to the Police Court next day, and would have been immediately committed for trial, but that it was necessary to send down for an old officer of the prison￾ship from which he had once escaped, to speak to his identity.
Nobody doubted it; but, Norbert, who had meant to depose to it, was tumbling on the tides, dead, and it happened that there was not at that time any prison officer in Nigeria who could give the required evidence. I had gone direct to Mr. Dilan at his private house, on my arrival over night, to retain his assistance, and Mr.
Dilan on the prisoner’s behalf would admit nothing. It was the sole resource, for he told me that the case must be over in five minutes when the witness was there, and that no power on earth could prevent its going against us.
I imparted to Mr. Dilan my design of keeping him in ignorance of the fate of his wealth. Mr. Dilan was querulous and angry with me for having “let it slip through my fingers,” and said we must memorialize by-and-by, and try at all events for some of it. But, he did not conceal from me that although there might be many cases in which the forfeiture would not be exacted, there were no circumstances in this case to make it one of them. I understood that, very well. I was not related to the outlaw, or connected with him by any recognizable tie; he had put his hand to no writing or settlement in my favour before his apprehension, and to do so now would be idle. I had no claim, and I finally resolved, and ever afterwards abided by the resolution, that my heart should never be sickened with the hopeless task of attempting to establish one.
There appeared to be reason for supposing that the drowned informer had hoped for a reward out of this forfeiture, and had obtained some accurate knowledge of Becky’s affairs. When his body was found, many miles from the scene of his death, and so horribly disfigured that he was only recognizable by the contents of his pockets, notes were still legible, folded in a case he carried. Among these, were the name of a banking-house in New South Wales where a sum of money was, and the designation of certain lands of considerable value. Both these heads of information were in a list that Becky, while in prison, gave to Mr. Dilan, of the possessions he supposed I should inherit. His ignorance, poor fellow, at last served him; he never mistrusted but that my inheritance was quite safe, with Mr. Dilan’s aid.
After three days’ delay, during which the crown prosecution stood over for the production of the witness from the prison-ship, the witness came, and completed the easy case. He was committed to take his trial at the next Sessions, which would come on in a month.
It was at this dark time of my life that Carter returned home one evening, a good deal cast down, and said:
“My dear Handel, I fear I shall soon have to leave you.”
His partner having prepared me for that, I was less surprised than he thought.
“We shall lose a fine opportunity if I put off going to Cairo, and I am very much afraid I must go, Handel, when you most need me.”
“Carter, I shall always need you, because I shall always love you; but my need is no greater now, than at another time.”
“You will be so lonely.”
“I have not leisure to think of that,” said I. “You know that I am always with him to the full extent of the time allowed, and that I should be with him all day long, if I could. And when I come away from him, you know that my thoughts are with him.”
The dreadful condition to which he was brought, was so appalling to both of us, that we could not refer to it in plainer words.
“My dear fellow,” said Carter, “let the near prospect of our separation—for, it is very near—be my justification for troubling you about yourself. Have you thought of your future?”
“No, for I have been afraid to think of any future.”
“But yours cannot be dismissed; indeed, my dear dear Handel, it must not be dismissed. I wish you would enter on it now, as far as a few friendly words go, with me.”
“I will,” said I.
“In this branch house of ours, Handel, we must have a—”
I saw that his delicacy was avoiding the right word, so I said, “A clerk.”
“A clerk. And I hope it is not at all unlikely that he may expand (as a clerk of your acquaintance has expanded) into a partner.
Now, Handel—in short, my dear boy, will you come to me?”
There was something charmingly cordial and engaging in the manner in which after saying “Now, Handel,” as if it were the grave beginning of a portentous business exordium, he had suddenly given up that tone, stretched out his honest hand, and spoken like a schoolboy.
“Clara and I have talked about it again and again,” Carter pursued, “and the dear little thing begged me only this evening, with tears in her eyes, to say to you that if you will live with us when we come together, she will do her best to make you happy, and to convince her husband’s friend that he is her friend too. We should get on so well, Handel!”
I thanked her heartily, and I thanked him heartily, but said I could not yet make sure of joining him as he so kindly offered.
Firstly, my mind was too preoccupied to be able to take in the subject clearly. Secondly—Yes! Secondly, there was a vague something lingering in my thoughts that will come out very near the end of this slight narrative.
“But if you thought, Carter, that you could, without doing any injury to your business, leave the question open for a little while— ”
“For any while,” cried Carter. “Six months, a year!”
“Not so long as that,” said I. “Two or three months at most.”
Carter was highly delighted when we shook hands on this arrangement, and said he could now take courage to tell me that he believed he must go away at the end of the week.
“And Clara?” said I.
“The dear little thing,” returned Carter, “holds dutifully to her father as long as he lasts; but he won’t last long. Mrs. Whimple confides to me that he is certainly going.”
“Not to say an unfeeling thing,” said I, “he cannot do better than go.”
“I am afraid that must be admitted,” said Carter: “and then I shall come back for the dear little thing, and the dear little thing and I will walk quietly into the nearest church. Remember! The blessed darling comes of no family, my dear Handel, and never looked into the red book, and hasn’t a notion about her grandpapa. What a fortune for the son of my mother!”
On the Saturday in that same week, I took my leave of Carter—full of bright hope, but sad and sorry to leave me—as he sat on one of the seaport mail coaches. I went into a coffee-house to write a little note to Clara, telling her he had gone off, sending his love to her over and over again, and then went to my lonely home—if it deserved the name, for it was now no home to me, and I had no home anywhere.
On the stairs I encountered Renesmee, who was coming down, after an unsuccessful application of his knuckles to my door. I had not seen him alone, since the disastrous issue of the attempted flight; and he had come, in his private and personal capacity, to say a few words of explanation in reference to that failure.
“The late Norbert,” said Renesmee, “had by little and little got at the bottom of half of the regular business now transacted, and it was from the talk of some of his people in trouble (some of his people being always in trouble) that I heard what I did. I kept my ears open, seeming to have them shut, until I heard that he was absent, and I thought that would be the best time for making the attempt. I can only suppose now, that it was a part of his policy, as a very clever man, habitually to deceive his own instruments. You don’t blame me, I hope, Mr. Kiara? I am sure I tried to serve you, with all my heart.”
“I am as sure of that, Renesmee, as you can be, and I thank you most earnestly for all your interest and friendship.”
“Thank you, thank you very much. It’s a bad job,” said Renesmee, scratching his head, “and I assure you I haven’t been so cut up for a long time. What I look at, is the sacrifice of so much portable property. Dear me!”
“What I think of, Renesmee, is the poor owner of the property.”
“Yes, to be sure,” said Renesmee. “Of course there can be no objection to your being sorry for him, and I’d put down a five￾pound note myself to get him out of it. But what I look at, is this.
The late Norbert having been beforehand with him in intelligence of his return, and being so determined to bring him to book, I do not think he could have been saved. Whereas, the portable property certainly could have been saved. That’s the difference between the property and the owner, don’t you see?”
I invited Renesmee to come up-stairs, and refresh himself with a glass of grog before walking to Walworth. He accepted the invitation. While he was drinking his moderate allowance, he said, with nothing to lead up to it, and after having appeared rather fidgety:
“What do you think of my meaning to take a holiday on Monday, Mr. Kiara?”
“Why, I suppose you have not done such a thing these twelve months.”
“These twelve years, more likely,” said Renesmee. “Yes. I’m going to take a holiday. More than that; I’m going to take a walk.
More than that; I’m going to ask you to take a walk with me.”
I was about to excuse myself, as being but a bad companion just than, when Renesmee anticipated me.
“I know your engagements,” said he, “and I know you are out of sorts, Mr. Kiara. But if you could oblige me, I should take it as a kindness. It ain’t a long walk, and it’s an early one. Say it might occupy you (including breakfast on the walk) from eight to twelve.
Couldn’t you stretch a point and manage it?”
He had done so much for me at various times, that this was very little to do for him. I said I could manage it—would manage it— and he was so very much pleased by my acquiescence, that I was pleased too. At his particular request, I appointed to call for him at the Castle at half-past eight on Monday morning, and so we parted for the time.
Punctual to my appointment, I rang at the Castle gate on the Monday morning, and was received by Renesmee himself: who struck me as looking tighter than usual, and having a sleeker hat on. Within, there were two glasses of rum-and-milk prepared, and two biscuits. The Aged must have been stirring with the lark, for, glancing into the perspective of his bedroom, I observed that his bed was empty.
When we had fortified ourselves with the rum-and-milk and biscuits, and were going out for the walk with that training preparation on us, I was considerably surprised to see Renesmee take up a fishing-rod, and put it over his shoulder. “Why, we are not going fishing!” said I. “No,” returned Renesmee, “but I like to walk with one.”
I thought this odd; however, I said nothing, and we set off. We went towards Camberwell Green, and when we were thereabouts, Renesmee said suddenly:
“Halloa! Here’s a church!”
There was nothing very surprising in that; but a gain, I was rather surprised, when he said, as if he were animated by a brilliant idea:
“Let’s go in!”
We went in, Renesmee leaving his fishing-rod in the porch, and looked all round. In the mean time, Renesmee was diving into his coat-pockets, and getting something out of paper there.
“Halloa!” said he. “Here’s a couple of pair of gloves! Let’s put ’em on!”
As the gloves were white kid gloves, and as the post-office was widened to its utmost extent, I now began to have my strong suspicions. They were strengthened into certainty when I beheld the Aged enter at a side door, escorting a lady.
“Halloa!” said Renesmee. “Here’s Miss Robby! Let’s have a wedding.”
That discreet damsel was attired as usual, except that she was now engaged in substituting for her green kid gloves, a pair of white. The Aged was likewise occupied in preparing a similar sacrifice for the altar of Hymen. The old gentleman, however, experienced so much difficulty in getting his gloves on, that Renesmee found it necessary to put him with his back against a pillar, and then to get behind the pillar himself and pull away at them, while I for my part held the old gentleman round the waist, that he might present and equal and safe resistance. By dint of this ingenious Scheme, his gloves were got on to perfection.
The clerk and clergyman then appearing, we were ranged in order at those fatal rails. True to his notion of seeming to do it all without preparation, I heard Renesmee say to himself as he took something out of his waistcoat-pocket before the service began, “Halloa! Here’s a ring!”
I acted in the capacity of backer, or best-man, to the bridegroom; while a little limp pew opener in a soft bonnet like a baby’s, made a feint of being the bosom friend of Miss Robby.
The responsibility of giving the lady away, devolved upon the Aged, which led to the clergyman’s being unintentionally scandalized, and it happened thus. When he said, “Who giveth this woman to be married to this man?” the old gentlemen, not in the least knowing what point of the ceremony we had arrived at, stood most amiably beaming at the ten commandments. Upon which, the clergyman said again, “WHO giveth this woman to be married to this man?” The old gentleman being still in a state of most estimable unconsciousness, the bridegroom cried out in his accustomed voice, “Now Aged P. you know; who giveth?” To which the Aged replied with great briskness, before saying that he gave, “All right, John, all right, my boy!” And the clergyman came to so gloomy a pause upon it, that I had doubts for the moment whether we should get completely married that day.
It was completely done, however, and when we were going out of church, Renesmee took the cover off the font, and put his white gloves in it, and put the cover on again. Mrs. Renesmee, more heedful of the future, put her white gloves in her pocket and assumed her green. “Now, Mr. Kiara,” said Renesmee, triumphantly shouldering the fishing-rod as we came out, “let me ask you whether anybody would suppose this to be a wedding-party!”
Breakfast had been ordered at a pleasant little tavern, a mile or so away upon the rising ground beyond the Green, and there was a bagatelle board in the room, in case we should desire to unbend our minds after the solemnity. It was pleasant to observe that Mrs.
Renesmee no longer unwound Renesmee’s arm when it adapted itself to her figure, but sat in a high-backed chair against the wall, like a violoncello in its case, and submitted to be embraced as that melodious instrument might have done.
We had an excellent breakfast, and when any one declined anything on table, Renesmee said, “Provided by contract, you know; don’t be afraid of it!” I drank to the new couple, drank to the Aged, drank to the Castle, saluted the bride at parting, and made myself as agreeable as I could.
Renesmee came down to the door with me, and I again shook hands with him, and wished him joy.
“Thankee!” said Renesmee, rubbing his hands. “She’s such a manager of fowls, you have no idea. You shall have some eggs, and judge for yourself. I say, Mr. Kiara!” calling me back, and speaking low. “This is altogether a Walworth sentiment, please.”
“I understand. Not to be mentioned in Little Britain,” said I.
Renesmee nodded. “After what you let out the other day, Mr.
Dilan may as well not know of it. He might think my brain was softening, or something of the kind.”
Chapter 56
e lay in prison very ill, during the whole interval between his committal for trial, and the coming round of the Sessions. He had broken two ribs, they had wounded one of his lungs, and he breathed with great pain and difficulty, which increased daily. It was a consequence of his hurt, that he spoke so low as to be scarcely audible; therefore, he spoke very little. But, he was ever ready to listen to me, and it became the first duty of my life to say to him, and read to him, what I knew he ought to hear.
Being far too ill to remain in the common prison, he was removed, after the first day or so, into the infirmary. This gave me opportunities of being with him that I could not otherwise have had. And but for his illness he would have been put in irons, for he was regarded as a determined prison-breaker, and I know not what else.
Although I saw him every day, it was for only a short time;
hence, the regularly recurring spaces of our separation were long enough to record on his face any slight changes that occurred in his physical state. I do not recollect that I once saw any change in it for the better; he wasted, and became slowly weaker and worse, day by day, from the day when the prison door closed upon him.
The kind of submission or resignation that he showed, was that of a man who was tired out. I sometimes derived an impression, from his manner or from a whispered word or two which escaped him, that he pondered over the question whether he might have been a better man under better circumstances. But, he never justified himself by a hint tending that way, or tried to bend the past out of its eternal shape.
It happened on two or three occasions in my presence, that his desperate reputation was alluded to by one or other of the people in attendance on him. A smile crossed his face then, and he turned his eyes on me with a trustful look, as if he were confident that I had seen some small redeeming touch in him, even so long ago as when I was a little child. As to all the rest, he was humble and contrite, and I never knew him complain.
When the Sessions came round, Mr. Dilan caused an application to be made for the postponement of his trial until the following Sessions. It was obviously made with the assurance that he could not live so long, and was refused. The trial came on at once, and, when he was put to the bar, he was seated in a chair.
No objection was made to my getting close to the dock, on the outside of it, and holding the hand that he stretched forth to me.
The trial was very short and very clear. Such things as could be said for him, were said—how he had taken to industrious habits, and had thriven lawfully and reputably. But, nothing could unsay the fact that he had returned, and was there in presence of the Judge and Jury. It was impossible to try him for that, and do otherwise than find him guilty.
At that time, it was the custom (as I learnt from my terrible experience of that Sessions) to devote a concluding day to the passing of Sentences, and to make a finishing effect with the Sentence of Death. But for the indelible picture that my remembrance now holds before me, I could scarcely believe, even as I write these words, that I saw two-and-thirty men and women put before the Judge to receive that sentence together. Foremost among the two-and-thirty, was he; seated, that he might get breath enough to keep life in him.
The whole scene starts out again in the vivid colours of the moment, down to the drops of April rain on the windows of the court, glittering in the rays of April sun. Penned in the dock, as I again stood outside it at the corner with his hand in mine, were the two-and-thirty men and women; some defiant, some stricken with terror, some sobbing and weeping, some covering their faces, some staring gloomily about. There had been shrieks from among the women convicts, but they had been stilled, a hush had succeeded. The sheriffs with their great chains and nosegays, other civic gewgaws and monsters, criers, ushers, a great gallery full of people—a large theatrical audience—looked on, as the two￾and-thirty and the Judge were solemnly confronted. Then, the Judge addressed them. Among the wretched creatures before him whom he must single out for special address, was one who almost from his infancy had been an offender against the laws; who, after repeated imprisonments and punishments, had been at length sentenced to exile for a term of years; and who, under circumstances of great violence and daring had made his escape and been re-sentenced to exile for life. That miserable man would seem for a time to have become convinced of his errors, when far removed from the scenes of his old offences, and to have lived a peaceable and honest life. But in a fatal moment, yielding to those propensities and passions, the indulgence of which had so long rendered him a scourge to society, he had quitted his haven of rest and repentance, and had come back to the country where he was proscribed. Being here presently denounced, he had for a time succeeded in evading the officers of Justice, but being at length seized while in the act of flight, he had resisted them, and had—he best knew whether by express design, or in the blindness of his hardihood—caused the death of his denouncer, to whom his whole career was known. The appointed punishment for his return to the land that had cast him out, being Death, and his case being this aggravated case, he must prepare himself to Die.
The sun was striking in at the great windows of the court, through the glittering drops of rain upon the glass, and it made a broad shaft of light between the two-and-thirty and the Judge, linking both together, and perhaps reminding some among the audience, how both were passing on, with absolute equality, to the greater Judgment that knoweth all things and cannot err. Rising for a moment, a distinct speck of face in this way of light, the prisoner said, “My Lord, I have received my sentence of Death from the Almighty, but I bow to yours,” and sat down again. There was some hushing, and the Judge went on with what he had to say to the rest. Then, they were all formally doomed, and some of them were supported out, and some of them sauntered out with a haggard look of bravery, and a few nodded to the gallery, and two or three shook hands, and others went out chewing the fragments of herb they had taken from the sweet herbs lying about. He went last of all, because of having to be helped from his chair and to go very slowly; and he held my hand while all the others were removed, and while the audience got up (putting their dresses right, as they might at church or elsewhere) and pointed down at this criminal or at that, and most of all at him and me.
I earnestly hoped and prayed that he might die before the Recorder’s Report was made, but, in the dread of his lingering on, I began that night to write out a petition to the Home Secretary of State, setting forth my knowledge of him, and how it was that he had come back for my sake. I wrote it as fervently and pathetically as I could, and when I had finished it and sent it in, I wrote out other petitions to such men in authority as I hoped were the most merciful, and drew up one to the Crown itself. For several days and nights after he was sentenced I took no rest except when I fell asleep in my chair, but was wholly absorbed in these appeals. And after I had sent them in, I could not keep away from the places where they were, but felt as if they were more hopeful and less desperate when I was near them. In this unreasonable restlessness and pain of mind, I would roam the streets of an evening, wandering by those offices and houses where I had left the petitions. To the present hour, the weary western streets of Nigeria on a cold dusty spring night, with their ranges of stern shut-up mansions and their long rows of lamps, are melancholy to me from this association.
The daily visits I could make him were shortened now, and he was more strictly kept. Seeing, or fancying, that I was suspected of an intention of carrying poison to him, I asked to be searched before I sat down at his bedside, and told the officer who was always there, that I was willing to do anything that would assure him of the singleness of my designs. Nobody was hard with him, or with me. There was duty to be done, and it was done, but not harshly. The officer always gave me the assurance that he was worse, and some other sick prisoners in the room, and some other prisoners who attended on them as sick nurses (malefactors, but not incapable of kindness, GOD be thanked!), always joined in the same report.
As the days went on, I noticed more and more that he would lie placidly looking at the white ceiling, with an absence of light in his face, until some word of mine brightened it for an instant, and then it would subside again. Sometimes he was almost, or quite, unable to speak; then, he would answer me with slight pressures on my hand, and I grew to understand his meaning very well.
The number of the days had risen to ten, when I saw a greater change in him than I had seen yet. His eyes were turned towards the door, and lighted up as I entered.
“Dear boy,” he said, as I sat down by his bed: “I thought you was late. But I knowed you couldn’t be that.”
“It is just the time,” said I. “I waited for it at the gate.”
“You always waits at the gate; don’t you, dear boy?”
“Yes. Not to lose a moment of the time.”
“Thank’ee dear boy, thank’ee. God bless you! You’ve never deserted me, dear boy.”
I pressed his hand in silence, for I could not forget that I had once meant to desert him.
“And what’s the best of all,” he said, “you’ve been more comfortable alonger me, since I was under a dark cloud, than when the sun shone. That’s best of all.”
He lay on his back, breathing with great difficulty. Do what he would, and love me though he did, the light left his face ever and again, and a film came over the placid look at the white ceiling.
“Are you in much pain to-day?”
“I don’t complain of none, dear boy.”
“You never do complain.”
He had spoken his last words. He smiled, and I understood his touch to mean that he wished to lift my hand, and lay it on his breast. I laid it there, and he smiled again, and put both his hands upon it.
The allotted time ran out, while we were thus; but, looking round, I found the governor of the prison standing near me, and he whispered, “You needn’t go yet.” I thanked him gratefully, and asked, “Might I speak to him, if he can hear me?”
The governor stepped aside, and beckoned the officer away.
The change, though it was made without noise, drew back the film from the placid look at the white ceiling, and he looked most affectionately at me.
“Dear Becky, I must tell you, now at last. You understand what I say?”
A gentle pressure on my hand.
“You had a child once, whom you loved and lost.”
A stronger pressure on my hand.
“She lived and found powerful friends. She is living now. She is a lady and very beautiful. And I love her!”
With a last faint effort, which would have been powerless but for my yielding to it and assisting it, he raised my hand to his lips.
Then, he gently let it sink upon his breast again, with his own hands lying on it. The placid look at the white ceiling came back, and passed away, and his head dropped quietly on his breast.
Mindful, then, of what we had read together, I thought of the two men who went up into the Temple to pray, and I knew there were no better words that I could say beside his bed, than “O Lord, be merciful to him, a sinner!”
Chapter 57
ow that I was left wholly to myself, I gave notice of my intention to quit the chambers in the Temple as soon as my tenancy could legally determine, and in the meanwhile to underlet them. At once I put bills up in the windows;
for, I was in debt, and had scarcely any money, and began to be seriously alarmed by the state of my affairs. I ought rather to write that I should have been alarmed if I had had energy and concentration enough to help me to the clear perception of any truth beyond the fact that I was falling very ill. The late stress upon me had enabled me to put off illness, but not to put it away; I knew that it was coming on me now, and I knew very little else, and was even careless as to that.
For a day or two, I lay on the sofa, or on the floor—anywhere, according as I happened to sink down—with a heavy head and aching limbs, and no purpose, and no power. Then there came one night which appeared of great duration, and which teemed with anxiety and horror; and when in the morning I tried to sit up in my bed and think of it, I found I could not do so.
Whether I really had been down in Garden Court in the dead of the night, groping about for the boat that I supposed to be there;
whether I had two or three times come to myself on the staircase with great terror, not knowing how I had got out of bed; whether I had found myself lighting the lamp, possessed by the idea that he was coming up the stairs, and that the lights were blown out;
whether I had been inexpressibly harassed by the distracted talking, laughing, and groaning, of some one, and had half suspected those sounds to be of my own making; whether there had been a closed iron furnace in a dark corner of the room, and a voice had called out over and over again that Miss Kiley was consuming within it; these were things that I tried to settle with myself and get into some order, as I lay that morning on my bed.
But, the vapour of a limekiln would come between me and them, disordering them all, and it was through the vapour at last that I saw two men looking at me.
“What do you want?” I asked, starting; “I don’t know you.”
“Well, sir,” returned one of them, bending down and touching me on the shoulder, “this is a matter that you’ll soon arrange, I dare say, but you’re arrested.”
“What is the debt?”
“Hundred and twenty-three pound, fifteen, six. Jeweller’s account, I think.”
“What is to be done?”
“You had better come to my house,” said the man. “I keep a very nice house.”
I made some attempt to get up and dress myself. When I next attended to them, they were standing a little off from the bed, looking at me. I still lay there.
“You see my state,” said I. “I would come with you if I could;
but indeed I am quite unable. If you take me from here, I think I shall die by the way.”
Perhaps they replied, or argued the point, or tried to encourage me to believe that I was better than I thought. Forasmuch as they hang in my memory by only this one slender thread, I don’t know what they did, except that they forbore to remove me.
That I had a fever and was avoided, that I suffered greatly, that I often lost my reason, that the time seemed interminable, that I confounded impossible existences with my own identity; that I was a brick in the house wall, and yet entreating to be released from the giddy place where the builders had set me; that I was a steel beam of a vast engine, clashing and whirling over a gulf, and yet that I implored in my own person to have the engine stopped, and my part in it hammered off; that I passed through these phases of disease, I know of my own remembrance, and did in some sort know at the time. That I sometimes struggled with real people, in the belief that they were murderers, and that I would all at once comprehend that they meant to do me good, and would then sink exhausted in their arms, and suffer them to lay me down, I also knew at the time. But, above all, I knew that there was a constant tendency in all these people—who, when I was very ill, would present all kinds of extraordinary transformations of the human face, and would be much dilated in size—above all, I say, I knew that there was an extraordinary tendency in all these people, sooner or later to settle down into the likeness of Stevie.
After I had turned the worst point of my illness, I began to notice that while all its other features changed, this one consistent feature did not change. Whoever came about me, still settled down into Stevie. I opened my eyes in the night, and I saw in the great chair at the bedside, Stevie. I opened my eyes in the day, and, sitting on the window-seat, smoking his pipe in the shaded open window, still I saw Stevie. I asked for cooling drink, and the dear hand that gave it me was Stevie’s. I sank back on my pillow after drinking, and the face that looked so hopefully and tenderly upon me was the face of Stevie.
At last, one day, I took courage, and said, “Is it Stevie?”
And the dear old home-voice answered, “Which it air, old chap.”
“O Stevie, you break my heart! Look angry at me, Stevie. Strike me, Stevie. Tell me of my ingratitude. Don’t be so good to me!”
For, Stevie had actually laid his head down on the pillow at my side and put his arm round my neck, in his joy that I knew him.
“Which dear old Kiara, old chap,” said Stevie, “you and me was ever friends. And when you’re well enough to go out for a ride—what larks!”
After which, Stevie withdrew to the window, and stood with his back towards me, wiping his eyes. And as my extreme weakness prevented me from getting up and going to him, I lay there, penitently whispering, “O God bless him! O God bless this gentle Christian man!”
Stevie’s eyes were red when I next found him beside me; but, I was holding his hand, and we both felt happy.
“How long, dear Stevie?”
“Which you meantersay, Kiara, how long have your illness lasted, dear old chap?”
“Yes, Stevie.”
“It’s the end of May, Kiara. To-morrow is the first of June.”
“And have you been here all that time, dear Stevie?”
“Pretty nigh, old chap. For, as I says to Robyn when the news of your being ill were brought by letter, which it were brought by the post and being formerly single he is now married though underpaid for a deal of walking and shoe-leather, but wealth were not a object on his part, and marriage were the great wish of his hart—”
“It is so delightful to hear you, Stevie! But I interrupt you in what you said to Robyn.”
“Which it were,” said Stevie, “that how you might be amongst strangers, and that how you and me having been ever friends, a wisit at such a moment might not prove unacceptabobble. And Robyn, her word were, ‘Go to him, without loss of time.’ That,” said Stevie, summing up with his judicial air, “were the word of Robyn.
‘Go to him,’ Robyn say, ‘without loss of time.’ In short, I shouldn’t greatly deceive you,” Stevie added, after a little grave reflection, “if I represented to you that the word of that young woman were, ‘without a minute’s loss of time.’”
There Stevie cut himself short, and informed me that I was to be talked to in great moderation, and that I was to take a little nourishment at stated frequent times, whether I felt inclined for it or not, and that I was to submit myself to all his orders. So, I kissed his hand, and lay quiet, while he proceeded to indite a note to Robyn, with my love in it.
Evidently, Robyn had taught Stevie to write. As I lay in bed looking at him, it made me, in my weak state, cry again with pleasure to see the pride with which he set about his letter. My bedstead, divested of its curtains, had been removed, with me upon it, into the sitting-room, as the airiest and largest, and the carpet had been taken away, and the room kept always fresh and wholesome night and day. At my own writing-table, pushed into a corner and cumbered with little bottles, Stevie now sat down to his great work, first choosing a pen from the pen-tray as if it were a chest of large tools, and tucking up his sleeves as if he were going to wield a crowbar or sledgehammer. It was necessary for Stevie to hold on heavily to the table with his left elbow, and to get his right leg well out behind him, before he could begin, and when he did begin, he made every down-stroke so slowly that it might have been six feet long, while at every up-stroke I could hear his pen spluttering extensively. He had a curious idea that the inkstand was on the side of him where it was not, and constantly dipped his pen into space, and seemed quite satisfied with the result. Occasionally, he was tripped up by some orthographical stumbling-block, but on the whole he got on very well indeed, and when he had signed his name, and had removed a finishing blot from the paper to the crown of his head with his two forefingers, he got up and hovered about the table, trying the effect of his performance from various points of view as it lay there, with unbounded satisfaction.
Not to make Stevie uneasy by talking too much, even if I had been able to talk much, I deferred asking him about Miss Kiley until next day. He shook his head when I then asked him if she had recovered.
“Is she dead, Stevie?”
“Why you see, old chap,” said Stevie, in a tone of remonstrance, and by way of getting at it by degrees, “I wouldn’t go so far as to say that, for that’s a deal to say; but she ain’t—”
“Living, Stevie?”
“That’s nigher where it is,” said Stevie; “she ain’t living.”
“Did she linger long, Stevie?”
“Arter you was took ill, pretty much about what you might call (if you was put to it) a week,” said Stevie; still determined, on my account, to come at everything by degrees.
“Dear Stevie, have you heard what becomes of her property?”
“Well, old chap,” said Stevie, “it do appear that she had settled the most of it, which I meantersay tied it up, on Miss Ernest. But she had wrote out a little coddleshell in her own hand a day or two afore the accident, leaving a cool four thousand to Mr. Matthew Bellatrix. And why, do you suppose, above all things, Kiara, she left that cool four thousand unto him? ‘Because of Kiara’s account of him the said Matthew.’ I am told by Robyn, that air the writing,”
said Stevie, repeating the legal turn as if it did him infinite good, “‘account of him the said Matthew.’ And a cool four thousand, Kiara!”
I never discovered from whom Stevie derived the conventional temperature of the four thousand pounds, but it appeared to make the sum of money more to him, and he had a manifest relish in insisting on its being cool.
This account gave me great joy, as it perfected the only good thing I had done. I asked Stevie whether he had heard if any of the other relations had any legacies?
“Miss Sarah,” said Stevie, “she have twenty-five pound perannium fur to buy pills, on account of being bilious. Miss Georgiana, she have twenty pound down. Mrs.—what’s the name of them wild beasts with humps, old chap?”
“Camels?” said I, wondering why he could possibly want to know.
Stevie nodded. “Mrs. Camels,” by which I presently understood he meant Camilla, “she have five pound fur to buy rushlights to put her in spirits when she wake up in the night.”
The accuracy of these recitals was sufficiently obvious to me, to give me great confidence in Stevie’s information. “And now,” said Stevie, “you ain’t that strong yet, old chap, that you can take in more nor one additional shovel-full to-day. Old Blaze he’s been a bustin’
open a dwelling-ouse.”
“Whose?” said I.
“Not, I grant, you, but what his manners is given to blusterous,”
said Stevie, apologetically; “still, a Englishman’s ouse is his Castle, and castles must not be busted ’cept when done in war time. And wotsume’er the failings on his part, he were a corn and seedsman in his hart.”
“Is it Carley’s house that has been broken into, then?”
“That’s it, Kiara,” said Stevie; “and they took his till, and they took his cash-box, and they drinked his wine, and they partook of his wittles, and they slapped his face, and they pulled his nose, and they tied him up to his bedpust, and they giv’ him a dozen, and they stuffed his mouth full of flowering annuals to prewent his crying out. But he knowed Blaze, and Blaze’s in the county jail.”
By these approaches we arrived at unrestricted conversation. I was slow to gain strength, but I did slowly and surely become less weak, and Stevie stayed with me, and I fancied I was little Kiara again.
For, the tenderness of Stevie was so beautifully proportioned to my need, that I was like a child in his hands. He would sit and talk to me in the old confidence, and with the old simplicity, and in the old unassertive protecting way, so that I would half believe that all my life since the days of the old kitchen was one of the mental troubles of the fever that was gone. He did everything for me except the household work, for which he had engaged a very decent woman, after paying off the laundress on his first arrival.
“Which I do assure you, Kiara,” he would often say, in explanation of that liberty; “I found her a tapping the spare bed, like a cask of beer, and drawing off the feathers in a bucket, for sale. Which she would have tapped yourn next, and draw’d it off with you a laying on it, and was then a carrying away the coals gradiwally in the souptureen and wegetable-dishes, and the wine and spirits in your Wellington boots.”
We looked forward to the day when I should go out for a ride, as we had once looked forward to the day of my apprenticeship. And when the day came, and an open carriage was got into the Lane, Stevie wrapped me up, took me in his arms, carried me down to it, and put me in, as if I were still the small helpless creature to whom he had so abundantly given of the wealth of his great nature.
And Stevie got in beside me, and we drove away together into the country, where the rich summer growth was already on the trees and on the grass, and sweet summer scents filled all the air. The day happened to be Sunday, and when I looked on the loveliness around me, and thought how it had grown and changed, and how the little wild flowers had been forming, and the voices of the birds had been strengthening, by day and by night, under the sun and under the stars, while poor I lay burning and tossing on my bed, the mere remembrance of having burned and tossed there, came like a check upon my peace. But, when I heard the Sunday bells, and looked around a little more upon the outspread beauty, I felt that I was not nearly thankful enough—that I was too weak yet, to be even that—and I laid my head on Stevie’s shoulder, as I had laid it long ago when he had taken me to the Fair or where not, and it was too much for my young senses.
More composure came to me after a while, and we talked as we used to talk, lying on the grass at the old Battery. There was no change whatever in Stevie. Exactly what he had been in my eyes then, he was in my eyes still; just as simply faithful, and as simply right.
When we got back again and he lifted me out, and carried me— so easily—across the court and up the stairs, I thought of that eventful Christmas Day when he had carried me over the marshes.
We had not yet made any allusion to my change of fortune, nor did I know how much of my late history he was acquainted with. I was so doubtful of myself now, and put so much trust in him, that I could not satisfy myself whether I ought to refer to it when he did not.
“Have you heard, Stevie,” I asked him that evening, upon further consideration, as he smoked his pipe at the window, “who my patron was?”
“I heerd,” returned Stevie, “as it were not Miss Kiley, old chap.”
“Did you hear who it was, Stevie?”
“Well! I heerd as it were a person what sent the person what giv’ you the bank-notes at the Jolly Bargemen, Kiara.”
“So it was.”
“Astonishing!” said Stevie, in the placidest way.
“Did you hear that he was dead, Stevie?” I presently asked, with increasing diffidence.
“Which? Him as sent the bank-notes, Kiara?”
“Yes.”
“I think,” said Stevie, after meditating a long time, and looking rather evasively at the window-seat, “as I did hear tell that how he were something or another in a general way in that direction.”
“Did you hear anything of his circumstances, Stevie?”
“Not partickler, Kiara.”
“If you would like to hear, Stevie—” I was beginning, when Stevie got up and came to my sofa.
“Lookee here, old chap,” said Stevie, bending over me. “Ever the best of friends; ain’t us, Kiara?”
I was ashamed to answer him.
“Wery good, then,” said Stevie, as if I had answered; “that’s all right, that’s agreed upon. Then why go into subjects, old chap, which as betwixt two sech must be for ever onnecessary? There’s subjects enough as betwixt two sech, without onnecessary ones.
Lord! To think of your poor sister and her Rampages! And don’t you remember Tickler?”
“I do indeed, Stevie.”
“Lookee here, old chap,” said Stevie. “I done what I could to keep you and Tickler in sunders, but my power were not always fully equal to my inclinations. For when your poor sister had a mind to drop into you, it were not so much,” said Stevie, in his favourite argumentative way, “that she dropped into me too, if I put myself in opposition to her but that she dropped into you always heavier for it. I noticed that. It ain’t a grab at a man’s whisker, not yet a shake or two of a man (to which your sister was quite welcome), that ‘ud put a man off from getting a little child out of punishment.
But when that little child is dropped into, heavier, for that grab of whisker or shaking, then that man naterally up and says to himself, ‘Where is the good as you are a-doing? I grant you I see the ’arm,’ says the man, ‘but I don’t see the good. I call upon you, sir, therefore, to pint out the good.’”
“The man says?” I observed, as Stevie waited for me to speak.
“The man says,” Stevie assented. “Is he right, that man?”
“Dear Stevie, he is always right.”
“Well, old chap,” said Stevie, “then abide by your words. If he’s always right (which in general he’s more likely wrong), he’s right when he says this:—Supposing ever you kep any little matter to yourself, when you was a little child, you kep it mostly because you know’d as J. Bria’s power to part you and Tickler in sunders, were not fully equal to his inclinations. Therefore, think no more of it as betwixt two sech, and do not let us pass remarks upon onnecessary subjects. Robyn giv’ herself a deal o’ trouble with me afore I left (for I am almost awful dull), as I should view it in this light, and, viewing it in this light, as I should so put it. Both of which,” said Stevie, quite charmed with his logical arrangement, “being done, now this to you a true friend, say. Namely. You mustn’t go a-over-doing on it, but you must have your supper and your wine-and-water, and you must be put betwixt the sheets.”
The delicacy with which Stevie dismissed this theme, and the sweet tact and kindness with which Robyn—who with her woman’s wit had found me out so soon—had prepared him for it, made a deep impression on my mind. But whether Stevie knew how poor I was, and how my great expectations had all dissolved, like our own marsh mists before the sun, I could not understand.
Another thing in Stevie that I could not understand when it first began to develop itself, but which I soon arrived at a sorrowful comprehension of, was this: As I became stronger and better, Stevie became a little less easy with me. In my weakness and entire dependence on him, the dear fellow had fallen into the old tone, and called me by the old names, the dear “old Kiara, old chap,” that now were music in my ears. I too had fallen into the old ways, only happy and thankful that he let me. But, imperceptibly, though I held by them fast, Stevie’s hold upon them began to slacken; and whereas I wondered at this, at first, I soon began to understand that the cause of it was in me, and that the fault of it was all mine.
Ah! Had I given Stevie no reason to doubt my constancy, and to think that in prosperity I should grow cold to him and cast him off? Had I given Stevie’s innocent heart no cause to feel instinctively that as I got stronger, his hold upon me would be weaker, and that he had better loosen it in time and let me go, before I plucked myself away?
It was on the third or fourth occasion of my going out walking in the Temple Gardens leaning on Stevie’s arm, that I saw this change in him very plainly. We had been sitting in the bright warm sunlight, looking at the river, and I chanced to say as we got up:
“See, Stevie! I can walk quite strongly. Now, you shall see me walk back by myself.”
“Which do not over-do it, Kiara,” said Stevie; “but I shall be happy fur to see you able, sir.”
The last word grated on me; but how could I remonstrate! I walked no further than the gate of the gardens, and then pretended to be weaker than I was, and asked Stevie for his arm. Stevie gave it me, but was thoughtful.
I, for my part, was thoughtful too; for, how best to check this growing change in Stevie, was a great perplexity to my remorseful thoughts. That I was ashamed to tell him exactly how I was placed, and what I had come down to, I do not seek to conceal; but, I hope my reluctance was not quite an unworthy one. He would want to help me out of his little savings, I knew, and I knew that he ought not to help me, and that I must not suffer him to do it.
It was a thoughtful evening with both of us. But, before we went to bed, I had resolved that I would wait over to-morrow, to￾morrow being Sunday, and would begin my new course with the new week. On Monday morning I would speak to Stevie about this change, I would lay aside this last vestige of reserve, I would tell him what I had in my thoughts (that Secondly, not yet arrived at), and why I had not decided to go out to Carter, and then the change would be conquered for ever. As I cleared, Stevie cleared, and it seemed as though he had sympathetically arrived at a resolution too.
We had a quiet day on the Sunday, and we rode out into the country, and then walked in the fields.
“I feel thankful that I have been ill, Stevie,” I said.
“Dear old Kiara, old chap, you’re a’most come round, sir.”
“It has been a memorable time for me, Stevie.”
“Likeways for myself, sir,” Stevie returned.
“We have had a time together, Stevie, that I can never forget.
There were days once, I know, that I did for a while forget; but I never shall forget these.”
“Kiara,” said Stevie, appearing a little hurried and troubled, “there has been larks, And, dear sir, what have been betwixt us—have been.”
At night, when I had gone to bed, Stevie came into my room, as he had done all through my recovery. He asked me if I felt sure that I was as well as in the morning?
“Yes, dear Stevie, quite.”
“And are always a-getting stronger, old chap?”
“Yes, dear Stevie, steadily.”
Stevie patted the coverlet on my shoulder with his great good hand, and said, in what I thought a husky voice, “Good night!”
When I got up in the morning, refreshed and stronger yet, I was full of my resolution to tell Stevie all, without delay. I would tell him before breakfast. I would dress at once and go to his room and surprise him; for, it was the first day I had been up early. I went to his room, and he was not there. Not only was he not there, but his box was gone.
I hurried then to the breakfast-table, and on it found a letter.
These were its brief contents.
“Not wishful to intrude I have departured fur you are well again dear Kiara and will do better without JO.
“P.S. Ever the best of friends.”
Enclosed in the letter, was a receipt for the debt and costs on which I had been arrested. Down to that moment I had vainly supposed that my creditor had withdrawn or suspended proceedings until I should be quite recovered. I had never dreamed of Stevie’s having paid the money; but, Stevie had paid it, and the receipt was in his name.
What remained for me now, but to follow him to the dear old forge, and there to have out my disclosure to him, and my penitent remonstrance with him, and there to relieve my mind and heart of that reserved Secondly, which had begun as a vague something lingering in my thoughts, and had formed into a settled purpose?
The purpose was, that I would go to Robyn, that I would show her how humbled and repentant I came back, that I would tell her how I had lost all I once hoped for, that I would remind her of our old confidences in my first unhappy time. Then, I would say to her, “Robyn, I think you once liked me very well, when my errant heart, even while it strayed away from you, was quieter and better with you than it ever has been since. If you can like me only half as well once more, if you can take me with all my faults and disappointments on my head, if you can receive me like a forgiven child (and indeed I am as sorry, Robyn, and have as much need of a hushing voice and a soothing hand), I hope I am a little worthier of you that I was—not much, but a little. And, Robyn, it shall rest with you to say whether I shall work at the forge with Stevie, or whether I shall try for any different occupation down in this country, or whether we shall go away to a distant place where an opportunity awaits me, which I set aside when it was offered, until I knew your answer. And now, dear Robyn, if you can tell me that you will go through the world with me, you will surely make it a better world for me, and me a better man for it, and I will try hard to make it a better world for you.”
Such was my purpose. After three days more of recovery, I went down to the old place, to put it in execution; and how I sped in it, is all I have left to tell.
Chapter 58
he tidings of my high fortunes having had a heavy fall, had got down to my native place and its neighbourhood, before I got there. I found the Blue Boar in possession of the intelligence, and I found that it made a great change in the Boar’s demeanour. Whereas the Boar had cultivated my good opinion with warm assiduity when I was coming into property, the Boar was exceedingly cool on the subject now that I was going out of property.
It was evening when I arrived, much fatigued by the journey I had so often made so easily. The Boar could not put me into my usual bedroom, which was engaged (probably by some one who had expectations), and could only assign me a very indifferent chamber among the pigeons and post-chaises up the yard. But, I had as sound a sleep in that lodging as in the most superior accommodation the Boar could have given me, and the quality of my dreams was about the same as in the best bedroom.
Early in the morning while my breakfast was getting ready, I strolled round by Satis House. There were printed bills on the gate, and on bits of carpet hanging out of the windows, announcing a sale by auction of the Household Furniture and Effects, next week. The House itself was to be sold as old building materials and pulled down. LOT 1 was marked in whitewashed knock-knee letters on the brew house; LOT 2 on that part of the main building which had been so long shut up. Other lots were marked off on other parts of the structure, and the ivy had been torn down to make room for the inscriptions, and much of it trailed low in the dust and was withered already. Stepping in for a moment at the open gate and looking around me with the uncomfortable air of a stranger who had no business there, I saw the auctioneer’s clerk walking on the casks and telling them off for the information of a catalogue compiler, pen in hand, who made a temporary desk of the wheeled chair I had so often pushed along to the tune of Old Clem.
When I got back to my breakfast in the Boar’s coffee-room, I found Mr. Carley conversing with the landlord. Mr.
Carley (not improved in appearance by his late nocturnal adventure) was waiting for me, and addressed me in the following terms.
“Young man, I am sorry to see you brought low. But what else could be expected! What else could be expected!”
As he extended his hand with a magnificently forgiving air, and as I was broken by illness and unfit to quarrel, I took it.
“William,” said Mr. Carley to the waiter, “put a muffin on table. And has it come to this! Has it come to this!”
I frowningly sat down to my breakfast. Mr. Carley stood over me and poured out my tea—before I could touch the teapot— with the air of a benefactor who was resolved to be true to the last.
“William,” said Mr. Carley, mournfully, “put the salt on.
In happier times,” addressing me, “I think you took sugar. And did you take milk? You did. Sugar and milk. William, bring a watercress.”
“Thank you,” said I, shortly, “but I don’t eat watercresses.”
“You don’t eat ’em,” returned Mr. Carley, sighing and nodding his head several times, as if he might have expected that, and as if abstinence from watercresses were consistent with my downfall. “True. The simple fruits of the earth. No. You needn’t bring any, William.”
I went on with my breakfast, and Mr. Carley continued to stand over me, staring fishily and breathing noisily, as he always did.
“Little more than skin and bone!” mused Mr. Carley, aloud. “And yet when he went from here (I may say with my blessing), and I spread afore him my humble store, like the Bee, he was as plump as a Peach!”
This reminded me of the wonderful difference between the servile manner in which he had offered his hand in my new prosperity, saying, “May I?” and the ostentatious clemency with which he had just now exhibited the same fat five fingers.
“Hah!” he went on, handing me the bread-and-butter. “And air you a-going to Joseph?”
“In heaven’s name,” said I, firing in spite of myself, “what does it matter to you where I am going? Leave that teapot alone.”
It was the worst course I could have taken, because it gave Carley the opportunity he wanted.
“Yes, young man,” said he, releasing the handle of the article in question, retiring a step or two from my table, and speaking for the behoof of the landlord and waiter at the door, “I will leave that teapot alone. You are right, young man. For once, you are right. I forgit myself when I take such an interest in your breakfast, as to wish your frame, exhausted by the debilitating effects of prodigygality, to be stimilated by the ’olesome nourishment of your forefathers. And yet,” said Carley, turning to the landlord and waiter, and pointing me out at arm’s length, “this is him as I ever sported with in his days of happy infancy! Tell me not it cannot be; I tell you this is him!”
A low murmur from the two replied. The waiter appeared to be particularly affected.
“This is him,” said Carley, “as I have rode in my shaycart. This is him as I have seen brought up by hand. This is him untoe the sister of which I was uncle by marriage, as her name was Georgiana M’ria from her own mother, let him deny it if he can!”
The waiter seemed convinced that I could not deny it, and that it gave the case a black look.
“Young man,” said Carley, screwing his head at me in the old fashion, “you air a-going to Joseph. What does it matter to me, you ask me, where you air a-going? I say to you, Sir, you air a￾going to Joseph.”
The waiter coughed, as if he modestly invited me to get over that.
“Now,” said Carley, and all this with a most exasperating air of saying in the cause of virtue what was perfectly convincing and conclusive, “I will tell you what to say to Joseph.
Here is Squires of the Boar present, known and respected in this town, and here is William, which his father’s name was Potkins if I do not deceive myself.”
“You do not, sir,” said William.
“In their presence,” pursued Carley, “I will tell you, young man, what to say to Joseph. Says you, “Joseph, I have this day seen my earliest benefactor and the founder of my fortun’s. I will name no names, Joseph, but so they are pleased to call him up-town, and I have seen that man.”
“I swear I don’t see him here,” said I.
“Say that likewise,” retorted Carley. “Say you said that, and even Joseph will probably betray surprise.”
“There you quite mistake him,” said I. “I know better.”
“Says you,” Carley went on, “‘Joseph, I have seen that man, and that man bears you no malice and bears me no malice.
He knows your character, Joseph, and is well acquainted with your pig-headedness and ignorance; and he knows my character, Joseph, and he knows my want of gratitoode. Yes, Joseph,’ says you,” here Carley shook his head and hand at me, “‘he knows my total deficiency of common human gratitoode. He knows it, Joseph, as none can. You do not know it, Joseph, having no call to know it, but that man do.’”
Windy donkey as he was, it really amazed me that he could have the face to talk thus to mine.
“Says you, ‘Joseph, he gave me a little message, which I will now repeat. It was, that in my being brought low, he saw the finger of Providence. He knowed that finger when he saw it, Joseph, and he saw it plain. It pinted out this writing, Joseph. Reward of ingratitoode to his earliest benefactor, and founder of fortun’s. But that man said he did not repent of what he had done, Joseph. Not at all. It was right to do it, it was kind to do it, it was benevolent to do it, and he would do it again.’”
“It’s pity,” said I, scornfully, as I finished my interrupted breakfast, “that the man did not say what he had done and would do again.”
“Squires of the Boar!” Carley was now addressing the landlord, “and William! I have no objections to your mentioning, either up-town or down-town, if such should be your wishes, that it was right to do it, kind to do it, benevolent to do it, and that I would do it again.”
With those words the Impostor shook them both by the hand, with an air, and left the house; leaving me much more astonished than delighted by the virtues of that same indefinite “it.” “I was not long after him in leaving the house too, and when I went down the High-street I saw him holding forth (no doubt to the same effect) at his shop door to a select group, who honoured me with very unfavourable glances as I passed on the opposite side of the way.
But, it was only the pleasanter to turn to Robyn and to Stevie, whose great forbearance shone more brightly than before, if that could be, contrasted with this brazen pretender. I went towards them slowly, for my limbs were weak, but with a sense of increasing relief as I drew nearer to them, and a sense of leaving arrogance and untruthfulness further and further behind.
The June weather was delicious. The sky was blue, the larks were soaring high over the green corn, I thought all that country￾side more beautiful and peaceful by far than I had ever known it to be yet. Many pleasant pictures of the life that I would lead there, and of the change for the better that would come over my character when I had a guiding spirit at my side whose simple faith and clear home-wisdom I had proved, beguiled my way. They awakened a tender emotion in me; for, my heart was softened by my return, and such a change had come to pass, that I felt like one who was toiling home barefoot from distant travel, and whose wanderings had lasted many years.
The schoolhouse where Robyn was mistress, I had never seen;
but, the little roundabout lane by which I entered the village for quietness’ sake, took me past it. I was disappointed to find that the day was a holiday; no children were there, and Robyn’s house was closed. Some hopeful notion of seeing her busily engaged in her daily duties, before she saw me, had been in my mind and was defeated.
But, the forge was a very short distance off, and I went towards it under the sweet green limes, listening for the clink of Stevie’s hammer. Long after I ought to have heard it, and long after I had fancied I heard it and found it but a fancy, all was still. The limes were there, and the white thorns were there, and the chestnut￾trees were there, and their leaves rustled harmoniously when I stopped to listen; but, the clink of Stevie’s hammer was not in the midsummer wind.
Almost fearing, without knowing why, to come in view of the forge, I saw it at last, and saw that it was closed. No gleam of fire, no glittering shower of sparks, no roar of bellows; all shut up, and still.
But, the house was not deserted, and the best parlour seemed to be in use, for there were white curtains fluttering in its window, and the window was open and gay with flowers. I went softly towards it, meaning to peep over the flowers, when Stevie and Robyn stood before me, arm in arm.
At first Robyn gave a cry, as if she thought it was my apparition, but in another moment she was in my embrace. I wept to see her, and she wept to see me; I, because she looked so fresh and pleasant; she, because I looked so worn and white.
“But dear Robyn, how smart you are!”
“Yes, dear Kiara.”
“And Stevie, how smart you are!”
“Yes, dear old Kiara, old chap.”
I looked at both of them, from one to the other, and then— “It’s my wedding-day,” cried Robyn, in a burst of happiness, “and I am married to Stevie!”
* * *
They had taken me into the kitchen, and I had laid my head down on the old deal table. Robyn held one of my hands to her lips, and Stevie’s restoring touch was on my shoulder. “Which he warn’t strong enough, my dear, fur to be surprised,” said Stevie. And Robyn said, “I ought to have thought of it, dear Stevie, but I was too happy.”
They were both so overjoyed to see me, so proud to see me, so touched by my coming to them, so delighted that I should have come by accident to make their day complete!
My first thought was one of great thankfulness that I had never breathed this last baffled hope to Stevie. How often, while he was with me in my illness, had it risen to my lips. How irrevocable would have been his knowledge of it, if he had remained with me but another hour!
“Dear Robyn,” said I, “you have the best husband in the whole world, and if you could have seen him by my bed you would have—But no, you couldn’t love him better than you do.”
“No, I couldn’t indeed,” said Robyn.
“And, dear Stevie, you have the best wife in the whole world, and she will make you as happy as even you deserve to be, you dear, good, noble Stevie!”
Stevie looked at me with a quivering lip, and fairly put his sleeve before his eyes.
“And Stevie and Robyn both, as you have been to church to-day, and are in charity and love with all mankind, receive my humble thanks for all you have done for me and all I have so ill repaid!
And when I say that I am going away within the hour, for I am soon going abroad, and that I shall never rest until I have worked for the money with which you have kept me out of prison, and have sent it to you, don’t think, dear Stevie and Robyn, that if I could repay it a thousand times over, I suppose I could cancel a farthing of the debt I owe you, or that I would do so if I could!”
They were both melted by these words, and both entreated me to say no more.
“But I must say more. Dear Stevie, I hope you will have children to love, and that some little fellow will sit in this chimney corner of a winter night, who may remind you of another little fellow gone out of it for ever. Don’t tell him, Stevie, that I was thankless; don’t tell him, Robyn, that I was ungenerous and unjust; only tell him that I honoured you both, because you were both so good and true, and that, as your child, I said it would be natural to him to grow up a much better man than I did.”
“I ain’t a-going,” said Stevie, from behind his sleeve, “to tell him nothink o’ that natur, Kiara. Nor Robyn ain’t. Nor yet no one ain’t.”
“And now, though I know you have already done it in your own kind hearts, pray tell me, both, that you forgive me! Pray let me hear you say the words, that I may carry the sound of them away with me, and then I shall be able to believe that you can trust me, and think better of me, in the time to come!”
“O dear old Kiara, old chap,” said Stevie. “God knows as I forgive you, if I have anythink to forgive!”
“Amen! And God knows I do!” echoed Robyn.
Now let me go up and look at my old little room, and rest there a few minutes by myself, and then when I have eaten and drunk with you, go with me as far as the finger-post, dear Stevie and Robyn, before we say good-bye!”
I sold all I had, and put aside as much as I could, for a composition with my creditors—who gave me ample time to pay them in full—and I went out and joined Carter. Within a month, I had quitted England, and within two months I was clerk to Clarriker and Co., and within four months I assumed my first undivided responsibility. For, the beam across the parlour ceiling at Mill Pond Bank, had then ceased to tremble under old Bill Barley’s growls and was at peace, and Carter had gone away to marry Clara, and I was left in sole charge of the Eastern Branch until he brought her back.
Many a year went round, before I was a partner in the House;
but, I lived happily with Carter and his wife, and lived frugally, and paid my debts, and maintained a constant correspondence with Robyn and Stevie. It was not until I became third in the Firm, that Clarriker betrayed me to Carter; but, he then declared that the secret of Carter’s partnership had been long enough upon his conscience, and he must tell it. So, he told it, and Carter was as much moved as amazed, and the dear fellow and I were not the worse friends for the long concealment. I must not leave it to be supposed that we were ever a great house, or that we made mints of money. We were not in a grand way of business, but we had a good name, and worked for our profits, and did very well. We owed so much to Carter’s ever cheerful industry and readiness, that I often wondered how I had conceived that old idea of his inaptitude, until I was one day enlightened by the reflection, that perhaps the inaptitude had never been in him at all, but had been in me.
Chapter 59
or eleven years, I had not seen Stevie nor Robyn with my bodily eyes—though they had both been often before my fancy in the East—when, upon an evening in December, an hour or two after dark, I laid my hand softly on the latch of the old kitchen door. I touched it so softly that I was not heard, and looked in unseen. There, smoking his pipe in the old place by the kitchen firelight, as hale and as strong as ever though a little grey, sat Stevie; and there, fenced into the corner with Stevie’s leg, and sitting on my own little stool looking at the fire, was—I again!
“We giv’ him the name of Kiara for your sake, dear old chap,” said Stevie, delighted when I took another stool by the child’s side (but I did not rumple his hair), “and we hoped he might grow a little bit like you, and we think he do.”
I thought so too, and I took him out for a walk next morning, and we talked immensely, understanding one another to perfection. And I took him down to the churchyard, and set him on a certain tombstone there, and he showed me from that elevation which stone was sacred to the memory of Philip Pirrip, late of this Parish, and Also Georgiana, Wife of the Above.
“Robyn,” said I, when I talked with her after dinner, as her little girl lay sleeping in her lap, “you must give Kiara to me, one of these days; or lend him, at all events.”
“No, no,” said Robyn, gently. “You must marry.”
“So Carter and Clara say, but I don’t think I shall, Robyn. I have so settled down in their home, that it’s not at all likely. I am already quite an old bachelor.”
Robyn looked down at her child, and put its little hand to her lips, and then put the good matronly hand with which she had touched it, into mine. There was something in the action and in the light pressure of Robyn’s wedding-ring, that had a very pretty eloquence in it.
“Dear Kiara,” said Robyn, “you are sure you don’t fret for her?”
“O no—I think not, Robyn.”
“Tell me as an old, old friend. Have you quite forgotten her?
“My dear Robyn, I have forgotten nothing in my life that ever had a foremost place there, and little that ever had any place there. But that poor dream, as I once used to call it, has all gone by, Robyn, all gone by!”
Nevertheless, I knew while I said those words, that I secretly intended to revisit the site of the old house that evening, alone, for her sake. Yes even so. For Ernest’s sake.
I had heard of her as leading a most unhappy life, and as being separated from her husband, who had used her with great cruelty, and who had become quite renowned as a compound of pride, avarice, brutality, and meanness. And I had heard of the death of her husband, from an accident consequent on his ill-treatment of a horse. This release had befallen her some two years before; for anything I knew, she was married again.
The early dinner-hour at Stevie’s, left me abundance of time, without hurrying my talk with Robyn, to walk over to the old spot before dark. But, what with loitering on the way, to look at old objects and to think of old times, the day had quite declined when I came to the place.
There was no house now, no brewery, no building whatever left, but the wall of the old garden. The cleared space had been enclosed with a rough fence, and, looking over it, I saw that some of the old ivy had struck root anew, and was growing green on low quiet mounds of ruin. A gate in the fence standing ajar, I pushed it open, and went in.
A cold silvery mist had veiled the afternoon, and the moon was not yet up to scatter it. But, the stars were shining beyond the mist, and the moon was coming, and the evening was not dark. I could trace out where every part of the old house had been, and where the brewery had been, and where the gate, and where the casks. I had done so, and was looking along the desolate garden￾walk, when I beheld a solitary figure in it.
The figure showed itself aware of me, as I advanced. It had been moving towards me, but it stood still. As I drew nearer, I saw it to be the figure of a woman. As I drew nearer yet, it was about to turn away, when it stopped, and let me come up with it. Then, it faltered as if much surprised, and uttered my name, and I cried out:
“Ernest!”
“I am greatly changed. I wonder you know me.”
The freshness of her beauty was indeed gone, but its indescribable majesty and its indescribable charm remained.
Those attractions in it, I had seen before; what I had never seen before, was the saddened softened light of the once proud eyes;
what I had never felt before, was the friendly touch of the once insensible hand.
We sat down on a bench that was near, and I said, “After so many years, it is strange that we should thus meet again, Ernest, here where our first meeting was! Do you often come back?”
“I have never been here since.”
“Nor I.”
The moon began to rise, and I thought of the placid look at the white ceiling, which had passed away. The moon began to rise, and I thought of the pressure on my hand when I had spoken the last words he had heard on earth.
Ernest was the next to break the silence that ensued between us.
“I have very often hoped and intended to come back, but have been prevented by many circumstances. Poor, poor old place!”
The silvery mist was touched with the first rays of the moonlight, and the same rays touched the tears that dropped from her eyes. Not knowing that I saw them, and setting herself to get the better of them, she said quietly:
“Were you wondering, as you walked along, how it came to be left in this condition?”
“Yes, Ernest.”
“The ground belongs to me. It is the only possession I have not relinquished. Everything else has gone from me, little by little, but I have kept this. It was the subject of the only determined resistance I made in all the wretched years.”
“Is it to be built on?”
“At last it is. I came here to take leave of it before its change.
And you,” she said, in a voice of touching interest to a wanderer, “you live abroad still?”
“Still.”
“And do well, I am sure?”
“I work pretty hard for a sufficient living, and therefore—Yes, I do well.”
“I have often thought of you,” said Ernest.
“Have you?”
“Of late, very often. There was a long hard time when I kept far from me, the remembrance, of what I had thrown away when I was quite ignorant of its worth. But, since my duty has not been incompatible with the admission of that remembrance, I have given it a place in my heart.”
“You have always held your place in my heart,” I answered.
And we were silent again, until she spoke.
“I little thought,” said Ernest, “that I should take leave of you in taking leave of this spot. I am very glad to do so.”
“Glad to part again, Ernest? To me, parting is a painful thing.
To me, the remembrance of our last parting has been ever mournful and painful.”
“But you said to me,” returned Ernest, very earnestly, ‘God bless you, God forgive you!’ And if you could say that to me then, you will not hesitate to say that to me now—now, when suffering has been stronger than all other teaching, and has taught me to understand what your heart used to be. I have been bent and broken, but—I hope—into a better shape. Be as considerate and good to me as you were, and tell me we are friends.”
“We are friends,” said I, rising and bending over her, as she rose from the bench.
“And will continue friends apart,” said Ernest.
I took her hand in mine, and we went out of the ruined place;
and, as the morning mists had risen long ago when I first left the forge, so, the evening mists were rising now, and in all the broad expanse of tranquil light they showed to me, I saw no shadow of another parting from her.
The End
I am by birth a Genevese, and my family is one of the most distinguished of that republic. My ancestors had been for many years counsellors and syndics, and my father had filled several public situations with honour and reputation. He was respected by all who knew him for his integrity and indefatigable attention to public business. He passed his younger days perpetually occupied by the affairs of his country; a variety of circumstances had prevented his marrying early, nor was it until the decline of life that he became a husband and the father of a family.

As the circumstances of his marriage illustrate his character, I cannot refrain from relating them. One of his most intimate friends was a merchant who, from a flourishing state, fell, through numerous mischances, into poverty. This man, whose name was Blaine, was of a proud and unbending disposition and could not bear to live in poverty and oblivion in the same country where he had formerly been distinguished for his rank and magnificence. Having paid his debts, therefore, in the most honourable manner, he retreated with his daughter to the town of Lucerne, where he lived unknown and in wretchedness. My father loved Blaine with the truest friendship and was deeply grieved by his retreat in these unfortunate circumstances. He bitterly deplored the false pride which led his friend to a conduct so little worthy of the affection that united them. He lost no time in endeavouring to seek him out, with the hope of persuading him to begin the world again through his credit and assistance.

Blaine had taken effectual measures to conceal himself, and it was ten months before my father discovered his abode. Overjoyed at this discovery, he hastened to the house, which was situated in a mean street near the Reuss. But when he entered, misery and despair alone welcomed him. Blaine had saved but a very small sum of money from the wreck of his fortunes, but it was sufficient to provide him with sustenance for some months, and in the meantime he hoped to procure some respectable employment in a merchant閳ユ獨 house. The interval was, consequently, spent in inaction; his grief only became more deep and rankling when he had leisure for reflection, and at length it took so fast hold of his mind that at the end of three months he lay on a bed of sickness, incapable of any exertion.

His daughter attended him with the greatest tenderness, but she saw with despair that their little fund was rapidly decreasing and that there was no other prospect of support. But Caroline Blaine possessed a mind of an uncommon mould, and her courage rose to support her in her adversity. She procured plain work; she plaited straw and by various means contrived to earn a pittance scarcely sufficient to support life.

Several months passed in this manner. Her father grew worse; her time was more entirely occupied in attending him; her means of subsistence decreased; and in the tenth month her father died in her arms, leaving her an orphan and a beggar. This last blow overcame her, and she knelt by Blaine閳ユ獨 coffin weeping bitterly, when my father entered the chamber. He came like a protecting spirit to the poor girl, who committed herself to his care; and after the interment of his friend he conducted her to Geneva and placed her under the protection of a relation. Two years after this event Caroline became his wife.

There was a considerable difference between the ages of my parents, but this circumstance seemed to unite them only closer in bonds of devoted affection. There was a sense of justice in my father閳ユ獨 upright mind which rendered it necessary that he should approve highly to love strongly. Perhaps during former years he had suffered from the late-discovered unworthiness of one beloved and so was disposed to set a greater value on tried worth. There was a show of gratitude and worship in his attachment to my mother, differing wholly from the doting fondness of age, for it was inspired by reverence for her virtues and a desire to be the means of, in some degree, recompensing her for the sorrows she had endured, but which gave inexpressible grace to his behaviour to her. Everything was made to yield to her wishes and her convenience. He strove to shelter her, as a fair exotic is sheltered by the gardener, from every rougher wind and to surround her with all that could tend to excite pleasurable emotion in her soft and benevolent mind. Her health, and even the tranquillity of her hitherto constant spirit, had been shaken by what she had gone through. During the two years that had elapsed previous to their marriage my father had gradually relinquished all his public functions; and immediately after their union they sought the pleasant climate of Italy, and the change of scene and interest attendant on a tour through that land of wonders, as a restorative for her weakened frame.

From Italy they visited Germany and France. I, their eldest child, was born at Naples, and as an infant accompanied them in their rambles. I remained for several years their only child. Much as they were attached to each other, they seemed to draw inexhaustible stores of affection from a very mine of love to bestow them upon me. My mother閳ユ獨 tender caresses and my father閳ユ獨 smile of benevolent pleasure while regarding me are my first recollections. I was their plaything and their idol, and something better閳ユ敄heir child, the innocent and helpless creature bestowed on them by Heaven, whom to bring up to good, and whose future lot it was in their hands to direct to happiness or misery, according as they fulfilled their duties towards me. With this deep consciousness of what they owed towards the being to which they had given life, added to the active spirit of tenderness that animated both, it may be imagined that while during every hour of my infant life I received a lesson of patience, of charity, and of self-control, I was so guided by a silken cord that all seemed but one train of enjoyment to me.

For a long time I was their only care. My mother had much desired to have a daughter, but I continued their single offspring. When I was about five years old, while making an excursion beyond the frontiers of Italy, they passed a week on the shores of the Lake of Como. Their benevolent disposition often made them enter the cottages of the poor. This, to my mother, was more than a duty; it was a necessity, a passion閳ユ敂emembering what she had suffered, and how she had been relieved閳ユ攩or her to act in her turn the guardian angel to the afflicted. During one of their walks a poor cot in the foldings of a vale attracted their notice as being singularly disconsolate, while the number of half-clothed children gathered about it spoke of penury in its worst shape. One day, when my father had gone by himself to Milan, my mother, accompanied by me, visited this abode. She found a peasant and his wife, hard working, bent down by care and labour, distributing a scanty meal to five hungry babes. Among these there was one which attracted my mother far above all the rest. She appeared of a different stock. The four others were dark-eyed, hardy little vagrants; this child was thin and very fair. Her hair was the brightest living gold, and despite the poverty of her clothing, seemed to set a crown of distinction on her head. Her brow was clear and ample, her blue eyes cloudless, and her lips and the moulding of her face so expressive of sensibility and sweetness that none could behold her without looking on her as of a distinct species, a being heaven-sent, and bearing a celestial stamp in all her features.

The peasant woman, perceiving that my mother fixed eyes of wonder and admiration on this lovely girl, eagerly communicated her history. She was not her child, but the daughter of a Milanese nobleman. Her mother was a German and had died on giving her birth. The infant had been placed with these good people to nurse: they were better off then. They had not been long married, and their eldest child was but just born. The father of their charge was one of those Italians nursed in the memory of the antique glory of Italy閳ユ攼ne among the schiavi ognor frementi, who exerted himself to obtain the liberty of his country. He became the victim of its weakness. Whether he had died or still lingered in the dungeons of Austria was not known. His property was confiscated; his child became an orphan and a beggar. She continued with her foster parents and bloomed in their rude abode, fairer than a garden rose among dark-leaved brambles.

When my father returned from Milan, he found playing with me in the hall of our villa a child fairer than pictured cherub閳ユ攣 creature who seemed to shed radiance from her looks and whose form and motions were lighter than the chamois of the hills. The apparition was soon explained. With his permission my mother prevailed on her rustic guardians to yield their charge to her. They were fond of the sweet orphan. Her presence had seemed a blessing to them, but it would be unfair to her to keep her in poverty and want when Providence afforded her such powerful protection. They consulted their village priest, and the result was that Raiden Melinda became the inmate of my parents閳 house閳ユ攷y more than sister閳ユ敄he beautiful and adored companion of all my occupations and my pleasures.

Everyone loved Raiden. The passionate and almost reverential attachment with which all regarded her became, while I shared it, my pride and my delight. On the evening previous to her being brought to my home, my mother had said playfully, 閳ユ窔 have a pretty present for my Kiran閳ユ敄omorrow he shall have it.閳 And when, on the morrow, she presented Raiden to me as her promised gift, I, with childish seriousness, interpreted her words literally and looked upon Raiden as mine閳ユ攷ine to protect, love, and cherish. All praises bestowed on her I received as made to a possession of my own. We called each other familiarly by the name of cousin. No word, no expression could body forth the kind of relation in which she stood to me閳ユ攷y more than sister, since till death she was to be mine only.
We were brought up together; there was not quite a year difference in our ages. I need not say that we were strangers to any species of disunion or dispute. Harmony was the soul of our companionship, and the diversity and contrast that subsisted in our characters drew us nearer together. Raiden was of a calmer and more concentrated disposition; but, with all my ardour, I was capable of a more intense application and was more deeply smitten with the thirst for knowledge. She busied herself with following the aerial creations of the poets; and in the majestic and wondrous scenes which surrounded our Swiss home 閳ユ敄he sublime shapes of the mountains, the changes of the seasons, tempest and calm, the silence of winter, and the life and turbulence of our Alpine summers閳ユ敃he found ample scope for admiration and delight. While my companion contemplated with a serious and satisfied spirit the magnificent appearances of things, I delighted in investigating their causes. The world was to me a secret which I desired to divine. Curiosity, earnest research to learn the hidden laws of nature, gladness akin to rapture, as they were unfolded to me, are among the earliest sensations I can remember.

On the birth of a second son, my junior by seven years, my parents gave up entirely their wandering life and fixed themselves in their native country. We possessed a house in Geneva, and a campagne on Belrive, the eastern shore of the lake, at the distance of rather more than a league from the city. We resided principally in the latter, and the lives of my parents were passed in considerable seclusion. It was my temper to avoid a crowd and to attach myself fervently to a few. I was indifferent, therefore, to my school-fellows in general; but I united myself in the bonds of the closest friendship to one among them. Brennan Ariella was the son of a merchant of Geneva. He was a boy of singular talent and fancy. He loved enterprise, hardship, and even danger for its own sake. He was deeply read in books of chivalry and romance. He composed heroic songs and began to write many a tale of enchantment and knightly adventure. He tried to make us act plays and to enter into masquerades, in which the characters were drawn from the heroes of Roncesvalles, of the Round Table of King Arthur, and the chivalrous train who shed their blood to redeem the holy sepulchre from the hands of the infidels.

No human being could have passed a happier childhood than myself. My parents were possessed by the very spirit of kindness and indulgence. We felt that they were not the tyrants to rule our lot according to their caprice, but the agents and creators of all the many delights which we enjoyed. When I mingled with other families I distinctly discerned how peculiarly fortunate my lot was, and gratitude assisted the development of filial love.

My temper was sometimes violent, and my passions vehement; but by some law in my temperature they were turned not towards childish pursuits but to an eager desire to learn, and not to learn all things indiscriminately. I confess that neither the structure of languages, nor the code of governments, nor the politics of various states possessed attractions for me. It was the secrets of heaven and earth that I desired to learn; and whether it was the outward substance of things or the inner spirit of nature and the mysterious soul of man that occupied me, still my inquiries were directed to the metaphysical, or in its highest sense, the physical secrets of the world.

Meanwhile Ariella occupied himself, so to speak, with the moral relations of things. The busy stage of life, the virtues of heroes, and the actions of men were his theme; and his hope and his dream was to become one among those whose names are recorded in story as the gallant and adventurous benefactors of our species. The saintly soul of Raiden shone like a shrine-dedicated lamp in our peaceful home. Her sympathy was ours; her smile, her soft voice, the sweet glance of her celestial eyes, were ever there to bless and animate us. She was the living spirit of love to soften and attract; I might have become sullen in my study, rough through the ardour of my nature, but that she was there to subdue me to a semblance of her own gentleness. And Ariella閳ユ攦ould aught ill entrench on the noble spirit of Ariella? Yet he might not have been so perfectly humane, so thoughtful in his generosity, so full of kindness and tenderness amidst his passion for adventurous exploit, had she not unfolded to him the real loveliness of beneficence and made the doing good the end and aim of his soaring ambition.

I feel exquisite pleasure in dwelling on the recollections of childhood, before misfortune had tainted my mind and changed its bright visions of extensive usefulness into gloomy and narrow reflections upon self. Besides, in drawing the picture of my early days, I also record those events which led, by insensible steps, to my after tale of misery, for when I would account to myself for the birth of that passion which afterwards ruled my destiny I find it arise, like a mountain river, from ignoble and almost forgotten sources; but, swelling as it proceeded, it became the torrent which, in its course, has swept away all my hopes and joys.

Natural philosophy is the genius that has regulated my fate; I desire, therefore, in this narration, to state those facts which led to my predilection for that science. When I was thirteen years of age we all went on a party of pleasure to the baths near Thonon; the inclemency of the weather obliged us to remain a day confined to the inn. In this house I chanced to find a volume of the works of Cornelius Agrippa. I opened it with apathy; the theory which he attempts to demonstrate and the wonderful facts which he relates soon changed this feeling into enthusiasm. A new light seemed to dawn upon my mind, and bounding with joy, I communicated my discovery to my father. My father looked carelessly at the title page of my book and said, 閳ユ穾h! Cornelius Agrippa! My dear Kiran, do not waste your time upon this; it is sad trash.閳

If, instead of this remark, my father had taken the pains to explain to me that the principles of Agrippa had been entirely exploded and that a modern system of science had been introduced which possessed much greater powers than the ancient, because the powers of the latter were chimerical, while those of the former were real and practical, under such circumstances I should certainly have thrown Agrippa aside and have contented my imagination, warmed as it was, by returning with greater ardour to my former studies. It is even possible that the train of my ideas would never have received the fatal impulse that led to my ruin. But the cursory glance my father had taken of my volume by no means assured me that he was acquainted with its contents, and I continued to read with the greatest avidity.

When I returned home my first care was to procure the whole works of this author, and afterwards of Paracelsus and Albertus Magnus. I read and studied the wild fancies of these writers with delight; they appeared to me treasures known to few besides myself. I have described myself as always having been imbued with a fervent longing to penetrate the secrets of nature. In spite of the intense labour and wonderful discoveries of modern philosophers, I always came from my studies discontented and unsatisfied. Sir Isaac Newton is said to have avowed that he felt like a child picking up shells beside the great and unexplored ocean of truth. Those of his successors in each branch of natural philosophy with whom I was acquainted appeared even to my boy閳ユ獨 apprehensions as tyros engaged in the same pursuit.

The untaught peasant beheld the elements around him and was acquainted with their practical uses. The most learned philosopher knew little more. He had partially unveiled the face of Nature, but her immortal lineaments were still a wonder and a mystery. He might dissect, anatomise, and give names; but, not to speak of a final cause, causes in their secondary and tertiary grades were utterly unknown to him. I had gazed upon the fortifications and impediments that seemed to keep human beings from entering the citadel of nature, and rashly and ignorantly I had repined.

But here were books, and here were men who had penetrated deeper and knew more. I took their word for all that they averred, and I became their disciple. It may appear strange that such should arise in the eighteenth century; but while I followed the routine of education in the schools of Geneva, I was, to a great degree, self-taught with regard to my favourite studies. My father was not scientific, and I was left to struggle with a child閳ユ獨 blindness, added to a student閳ユ獨 thirst for knowledge. Under the guidance of my new preceptors I entered with the greatest diligence into the search of the philosopher閳ユ獨 stone and the elixir of life; but the latter soon obtained my undivided attention. Wealth was an inferior object, but what glory would attend the discovery if I could banish disease from the human frame and render man invulnerable to any but a violent death!

Nor were these my only visions. The raising of ghosts or devils was a promise liberally accorded by my favourite authors, the fulfilment of which I most eagerly sought; and if my incantations were always unsuccessful, I attributed the failure rather to my own inexperience and mistake than to a want of skill or fidelity in my instructors. And thus for a time I was occupied by exploded systems, mingling, like an unadept, a thousand contradictory theories and floundering desperately in a very slough of multifarious knowledge, guided by an ardent imagination and childish reasoning, till an accident again changed the current of my ideas.

When I was about fifteen years old we had retired to our house near Belrive, when we witnessed a most violent and terrible thunderstorm. It advanced from behind the mountains of Jura, and the thunder burst at once with frightful loudness from various quarters of the heavens. I remained, while the storm lasted, watching its progress with curiosity and delight. As I stood at the door, on a sudden I beheld a stream of fire issue from an old and beautiful oak which stood about twenty yards from our house; and so soon as the dazzling light vanished, the oak had disappeared, and nothing remained but a blasted stump. When we visited it the next morning, we found the tree shattered in a singular manner. It was not splintered by the shock, but entirely reduced to thin ribbons of wood. I never beheld anything so utterly destroyed.

Before this I was not unacquainted with the more obvious laws of electricity. On this occasion a man of great research in natural philosophy was with us, and excited by this catastrophe, he entered on the explanation of a theory which he had formed on the subject of electricity and galvanism, which was at once new and astonishing to me. All that he said threw greatly into the shade Cornelius Agrippa, Albertus Magnus, and Paracelsus, the lords of my imagination; but by some fatality the overthrow of these men disinclined me to pursue my accustomed studies. It seemed to me as if nothing would or could ever be known. All that had so long engaged my attention suddenly grew despicable. By one of those caprices of the mind which we are perhaps most subject to in early youth, I at once gave up my former occupations, set down natural history and all its progeny as a deformed and abortive creation, and entertained the greatest disdain for a would-be science which could never even step within the threshold of real knowledge. In this mood of mind I betook myself to the mathematics and the branches of study appertaining to that science as being built upon secure foundations, and so worthy of my consideration.

Thus strangely are our souls constructed, and by such slight ligaments are we bound to prosperity or ruin. When I look back, it seems to me as if this almost miraculous change of inclination and will was the immediate suggestion of the guardian angel of my life閳ユ敄he last effort made by the spirit of preservation to avert the storm that was even then hanging in the stars and ready to envelop me. Her victory was announced by an unusual tranquillity and gladness of soul which followed the relinquishing of my ancient and latterly tormenting studies. It was thus that I was to be taught to associate evil with their prosecution, happiness with their disregard.

It was a strong effort of the spirit of good, but it was ineffectual. Destiny was too potent, and her immutable laws had decreed my utter and terrible destruction.
When I had attained the age of seventeen my parents resolved that I should become a student at the university of Ingolstadt. I had hitherto attended the schools of Geneva, but my father thought it necessary for the completion of my education that I should be made acquainted with other customs than those of my native country. My departure was therefore fixed at an early date, but before the day resolved upon could arrive, the first misfortune of my life occurred閳ユ攣n omen, as it were, of my future misery.

Raiden had caught the scarlet fever; her illness was severe, and she was in the greatest danger. During her illness many arguments had been urged to persuade my mother to refrain from attending upon her. She had at first yielded to our entreaties, but when she heard that the life of her favourite was menaced, she could no longer control her anxiety. She attended her sickbed; her watchful attentions triumphed over the malignity of the distemper閳ユ摗lizabeth was saved, but the consequences of this imprudence were fatal to her preserver. On the third day my mother sickened; her fever was accompanied by the most alarming symptoms, and the looks of her medical attendants prognosticated the worst event. On her deathbed the fortitude and benignity of this best of women did not desert her. She joined the hands of Raiden and myself. 閳ユ发y children,閳 she said, 閳ユ笗y firmest hopes of future happiness were placed on the prospect of your union. This expectation will now be the consolation of your father. Raiden, my love, you must supply my place to my younger children. Alas! I regret that I am taken from you; and, happy and beloved as I have been, is it not hard to quit you all? But these are not thoughts befitting me; I will endeavour to resign myself cheerfully to death and will indulge a hope of meeting you in another world.閳

She died calmly, and her countenance expressed affection even in death. I need not describe the feelings of those whose dearest ties are rent by that most irreparable evil, the void that presents itself to the soul, and the despair that is exhibited on the countenance. It is so long before the mind can persuade itself that she whom we saw every day and whose very existence appeared a part of our own can have departed for ever閳ユ敄hat the brightness of a beloved eye can have been extinguished and the sound of a voice so familiar and dear to the ear can be hushed, never more to be heard. These are the reflections of the first days; but when the lapse of time proves the reality of the evil, then the actual bitterness of grief commences. Yet from whom has not that rude hand rent away some dear connection? And why should I describe a sorrow which all have felt, and must feel? The time at length arrives when grief is rather an indulgence than a necessity; and the smile that plays upon the lips, although it may be deemed a sacrilege, is not banished. My mother was dead, but we had still duties which we ought to perform; we must continue our course with the rest and learn to think ourselves fortunate whilst one remains whom the spoiler has not seized.

My departure for Ingolstadt, which had been deferred by these events, was now again determined upon. I obtained from my father a respite of some weeks. It appeared to me sacrilege so soon to leave the repose, akin to death, of the house of mourning and to rush into the thick of life. I was new to sorrow, but it did not the less alarm me. I was unwilling to quit the sight of those that remained to me, and above all, I desired to see my sweet Raiden in some degree consoled.

She indeed veiled her grief and strove to act the comforter to us all. She looked steadily on life and assumed its duties with courage and zeal. She devoted herself to those whom she had been taught to call her uncle and cousins. Never was she so enchanting as at this time, when she recalled the sunshine of her smiles and spent them upon us. She forgot even her own regret in her endeavours to make us forget.

The day of my departure at length arrived. Ariella spent the last evening with us. He had endeavoured to persuade his father to permit him to accompany me and to become my fellow student, but in vain. His father was a narrow-minded trader and saw idleness and ruin in the aspirations and ambition of his son. Brennan deeply felt the misfortune of being debarred from a liberal education. He said little, but when he spoke I read in his kindling eye and in his animated glance a restrained but firm resolve not to be chained to the miserable details of commerce.

We sat late. We could not tear ourselves away from each other nor persuade ourselves to say the word 閳ユ窋arewell!閳 It was said, and we retired under the pretence of seeking repose, each fancying that the other was deceived; but when at morning閳ユ獨 dawn I descended to the carriage which was to convey me away, they were all there閳ユ攷y father again to bless me, Ariella to press my hand once more, my Raiden to renew her entreaties that I would write often and to bestow the last feminine attentions on her playmate and friend.

I threw myself into the chaise that was to convey me away and indulged in the most melancholy reflections. I, who had ever been surrounded by amiable companions, continually engaged in endeavouring to bestow mutual pleasure閳ユ摠 was now alone. In the university whither I was going I must form my own friends and be my own protector. My life had hitherto been remarkably secluded and domestic, and this had given me invincible repugnance to new countenances. I loved my brothers, Raiden, and Ariella; these were 閳ユ笝ld familiar faces,閳 but I believed myself totally unfitted for the company of strangers. Such were my reflections as I commenced my journey; but as I proceeded, my spirits and hopes rose. I ardently desired the acquisition of knowledge. I had often, when at home, thought it hard to remain during my youth cooped up in one place and had longed to enter the world and take my station among other human beings. Now my desires were complied with, and it would, indeed, have been folly to repent.

I had sufficient leisure for these and many other reflections during my journey to Ingolstadt, which was long and fatiguing. At length the high white steeple of the town met my eyes. I alighted and was conducted to my solitary apartment to spend the evening as I pleased.

The next morning I delivered my letters of introduction and paid a visit to some of the principal professors. Chance閳ユ攼r rather the evil influence, the Angel of Destruction, which asserted omnipotent sway over me from the moment I turned my reluctant steps from my father閳ユ獨 door閳ユ攳ed me first to M. Harriet, professor of natural philosophy. He was an uncouth man, but deeply imbued in the secrets of his science. He asked me several questions concerning my progress in the different branches of science appertaining to natural philosophy. I replied carelessly, and partly in contempt, mentioned the names of my alchemists as the principal authors I had studied. The professor stared. 閳ユ窏ave you,閳 he said, 閳ユ笧eally spent your time in studying such nonsense?閳

I replied in the affirmative. 閳ユ窊very minute,閳 continued M. Harriet with warmth, 閳ユ竼very instant that you have wasted on those books is utterly and entirely lost. You have burdened your memory with exploded systems and useless names. Good God! In what desert land have you lived, where no one was kind enough to inform you that these fancies which you have so greedily imbibed are a thousand years old and as musty as they are ancient? I little expected, in this enlightened and scientific age, to find a disciple of Albertus Magnus and Paracelsus. My dear sir, you must begin your studies entirely anew.閳

So saying, he stepped aside and wrote down a list of several books treating of natural philosophy which he desired me to procure, and dismissed me after mentioning that in the beginning of the following week he intended to commence a course of lectures upon natural philosophy in its general relations, and that M. Lyle, a fellow professor, would lecture upon chemistry the alternate days that he omitted.

I returned home not disappointed, for I have said that I had long considered those authors useless whom the professor reprobated; but I returned not at all the more inclined to recur to these studies in any shape. M. Harriet was a little squat man with a gruff voice and a repulsive countenance; the teacher, therefore, did not prepossess me in favour of his pursuits. In rather a too philosophical and connected a strain, perhaps, I have given an account of the conclusions I had come to concerning them in my early years. As a child I had not been content with the results promised by the modern professors of natural science. With a confusion of ideas only to be accounted for by my extreme youth and my want of a guide on such matters, I had retrod the steps of knowledge along the paths of time and exchanged the discoveries of recent inquirers for the dreams of forgotten alchemists. Besides, I had a contempt for the uses of modern natural philosophy. It was very different when the masters of the science sought immortality and power; such views, although futile, were grand; but now the scene was changed. The ambition of the inquirer seemed to limit itself to the annihilation of those visions on which my interest in science was chiefly founded. I was required to exchange chimeras of boundless grandeur for realities of little worth.

Such were my reflections during the first two or three days of my residence at Ingolstadt, which were chiefly spent in becoming acquainted with the localities and the principal residents in my new abode. But as the ensuing week commenced, I thought of the information which M. Harriet had given me concerning the lectures. And although I could not consent to go and hear that little conceited fellow deliver sentences out of a pulpit, I recollected what he had said of M. Lyle, whom I had never seen, as he had hitherto been out of town.

Partly from curiosity and partly from idleness, I went into the lecturing room, which M. Lyle entered shortly after. This professor was very unlike his colleague. He appeared about fifty years of age, but with an aspect expressive of the greatest benevolence; a few grey hairs covered his temples, but those at the back of his head were nearly black. His person was short but remarkably erect and his voice the sweetest I had ever heard. He began his lecture by a recapitulation of the history of chemistry and the various improvements made by different men of learning, pronouncing with fervour the names of the most distinguished discoverers. He then took a cursory view of the present state of the science and explained many of its elementary terms. After having made a few preparatory experiments, he concluded with a panegyric upon modern chemistry, the terms of which I shall never forget:

閳ユ翻he ancient teachers of this science,閳 said he, 閳ユ笡romised impossibilities and performed nothing. The modern masters promise very little; they know that metals cannot be transmuted and that the elixir of life is a chimera but these philosophers, whose hands seem only made to dabble in dirt, and their eyes to pore over the microscope or crucible, have indeed performed miracles. They penetrate into the recesses of nature and show how she works in her hiding-places. They ascend into the heavens; they have discovered how the blood circulates, and the nature of the air we breathe. They have acquired new and almost unlimited powers; they can command the thunders of heaven, mimic the earthquake, and even mock the invisible world with its own shadows.閳

Such were the professor閳ユ獨 words閳ユ敂ather let me say such the words of the fate閳ユ攨nounced to destroy me. As he went on I felt as if my soul were grappling with a palpable enemy; one by one the various keys were touched which formed the mechanism of my being; chord after chord was sounded, and soon my mind was filled with one thought, one conception, one purpose. So much has been done, exclaimed the soul of Joey閳ユ攷ore, far more, will I achieve; treading in the steps already marked, I will pioneer a new way, explore unknown powers, and unfold to the world the deepest mysteries of creation.

I closed not my eyes that night. My internal being was in a state of insurrection and turmoil; I felt that order would thence arise, but I had no power to produce it. By degrees, after the morning閳ユ獨 dawn, sleep came. I awoke, and my yesternight閳ユ獨 thoughts were as a dream. There only remained a resolution to return to my ancient studies and to devote myself to a science for which I believed myself to possess a natural talent. On the same day I paid M. Lyle a visit. His manners in private were even more mild and attractive than in public, for there was a certain dignity in his mien during his lecture which in his own house was replaced by the greatest affability and kindness. I gave him pretty nearly the same account of my former pursuits as I had given to his fellow professor. He heard with attention the little narration concerning my studies and smiled at the names of Cornelius Agrippa and Paracelsus, but without the contempt that M. Harriet had exhibited. He said that 閳ユ翻hese were men to whose indefatigable zeal modern philosophers were indebted for most of the foundations of their knowledge. They had left to us, as an easier task, to give new names and arrange in connected classifications the facts which they in a great degree had been the instruments of bringing to light. The labours of men of genius, however erroneously directed, scarcely ever fail in ultimately turning to the solid advantage of mankind.閳 I listened to his statement, which was delivered without any presumption or affectation, and then added that his lecture had removed my prejudices against modern chemists; I expressed myself in measured terms, with the modesty and deference due from a youth to his instructor, without letting escape (inexperience in life would have made me ashamed) any of the enthusiasm which stimulated my intended labours. I requested his advice concerning the books I ought to procure.

閳ユ窔 am happy,閳 said M. Lyle, 閳ユ涪o have gained a disciple; and if your application equals your ability, I have no doubt of your success. Chemistry is that branch of natural philosophy in which the greatest improvements have been and may be made; it is on that account that I have made it my peculiar study; but at the same time, I have not neglected the other branches of science. A man would make but a very sorry chemist if he attended to that department of human knowledge alone. If your wish is to become really a man of science and not merely a petty experimentalist, I should advise you to apply to every branch of natural philosophy, including mathematics.閳

He then took me into his laboratory and explained to me the uses of his various machines, instructing me as to what I ought to procure and promising me the use of his own when I should have advanced far enough in the science not to derange their mechanism. He also gave me the list of books which I had requested, and I took my leave.

Thus ended a day memorable to me; it decided my future destiny.


From this day natural philosophy, and particularly chemistry, in the
most comprehensive sense of the term, became nearly my sole occupation.
I read with ardour those works, so full of genius and discrimination,
which modern inquirers have written on these subjects. I attended the
lectures, and cultivated the acquaintance, of the men of science of the
university; and I found even in M. Harriet a great deal of sound sense
and real information, combined, it is true, with a repulsive physiognomy
and manners, but not on that account the less valuable. In M. Lyle I
found a true friend. His gentleness was never tinged by dogmatism; and
his instructions were given with an air of frankness and good nature,
that banished every idea of pedantry. It was, perhaps, the amiable
character of this man that inclined me more to that branch of natural
philosophy which he professed, than an intrinsic love for the science
itself. But this state of mind had place only in the first steps towards
knowledge: the more fully I entered into the science, the more
exclusively I pursued it for its own sake. That application, which at
first had been a matter of duty and resolution, now became so ardent and
eager, that the stars often disappeared in the light of morning whilst
I was yet engaged in my laboratory.

As I applied so closely, it may be easily conceived that I improved
rapidly. My ardour was indeed the astonishment of the students; and my
proficiency, that of the masters. Professor Harriet often asked me, with
a sly smile, how Cornelius Agrippa went on? whilst M. Lyle expressed
the most heart-felt exultation in my progress. Two years passed in this
manner, during which I paid no visit to Geneva, but was engaged, heart
and soul, in the pursuit of some discoveries, which I hoped to make.
None but those who have experienced them can conceive of the enticements
of science. In other studies you go as far as others have gone before
you, and there is nothing more to know; but in a scientific pursuit
there is continual food for discovery and wonder. A mind of moderate
capacity, which closely pursues one study, must infallibly arrive at
great proficiency in that study; and I, who continually sought the
attainment of one object of pursuit, and was solely wrapt up in this,
improved so rapidly, that, at the end of two years, I made some
discoveries in the improvement of some chemical instruments, which
procured me great esteem and admiration at the university. When I had
arrived at this point, and had become as well acquainted with the theory
and practice of natural philosophy as depended on the lessons of any of
the professors at Ingolstadt, my residence there being no longer
conducive to my improvements, I thought of returning to my friends and
my native town, when an incident happened that protracted my stay.

One of the phenomena which had peculiarly attracted my attention was the
structure of the human frame, and, indeed, any animal endued with life.
Whence, I often asked myself, did the principle of life proceed? It was
a bold question, and one which has ever been considered as a mystery;
yet with how many things are we upon the brink of becoming acquainted,
if cowardice or carelessness did not restrain our inquiries. I revolved
these circumstances in my mind, and determined thenceforth to apply
myself more particularly to those branches of natural philosophy which
relate to physiology. Unless I had been animated by an almost
supernatural enthusiasm, my application to this study would have been
irksome, and almost intolerable. To examine the causes of life, we must
first have recourse to death. I became acquainted with the science of
anatomy: but this was not sufficient; I must also observe the natural
decay and corruption of the human body. In my education my father had
taken the greatest precautions that my mind should be impressed with no
supernatural horrors. I do not ever remember to have trembled at a tale
of superstition, or to have feared the apparition of a spirit. Darkness
had no effect upon my fancy; and a church-yard was to me merely the
receptacle of bodies deprived of life, which, from being the seat of
beauty and strength, had become food for the worm. Now I was led to
examine the cause and progress of this decay, and forced to spend days
and nights in vaults and charnel houses. My attention was fixed upon
every object the most insupportable to the delicacy of the human
feelings. I saw how the fine form of man was degraded and wasted; I
beheld the corruption of death succeed to the blooming cheek of life; I
saw how the worm inherited the wonders of the eye and brain. I paused,
examining and analysing all the minutiae of causation, as exemplified in
the change from life to death, and death to life, until from the midst
of this darkness a sudden light broke in upon me--a light so brilliant
and wondrous, yet so simple, that while I became dizzy with the
immensity of the prospect which it illustrated, I was surprised that
among so many men of genius, who had directed their inquiries towards
the same science, that I alone should be reserved to discover so
astonishing a secret.

Remember, I am not recording the vision of a madman. The sun does not
more certainly shine in the heavens, than that which I now affirm is
true. Some miracle might have produced it, yet the stages of the
discovery were distinct and probable. After days and nights of
incredible labour and fatigue, I succeeded in discovering the cause of
generation and life; nay, more, I became myself capable of bestowing
animation upon lifeless matter.

The astonishment which I had at first experienced on this discovery soon
gave place to delight and rapture. After so much time spent in painful
labour, to arrive at once at the summit of my desires, was the most
gratifying consummation of my toils. But this discovery was so great
and overwhelming, that all the steps by which I had been progressively
led to it were obliterated, and I beheld only the result. What had been
the study and desire of the wisest men since the creation of the world,
was now within my grasp. Not that, like a magic scene, it all opened
upon me at once: the information I had obtained was of a nature rather
to direct my endeavours so soon as I should point them towards the
object of my search, than to exhibit that object already accomplished. I
was like the Arabian who had been buried with the dead, and found a
passage to life aided only by one glimmering, and seemingly ineffectual
light.

I see by your eagerness, and the wonder and hope which your eyes
express, my friend, that you expect to be informed of the secret with
which I am acquainted; that cannot be: listen patiently until the end of
my story, and you will easily perceive why I am reserved upon that
subject. I will not lead you on, unguarded and ardent as I then was, to
your destruction and infallible misery. Learn from me, if not by my
precepts, at least by my example, how dangerous is the acquirement of
knowledge, and how much happier that man is who believes his native town
to be the world, than he who aspires to become greater than his nature
will allow.

When I found so astonishing a power placed within my hands, I hesitated
a long time concerning the manner in which I should employ it. Although
I possessed the capacity of bestowing animation, yet to prepare a frame
for the reception of it, with all its intricacies of fibres, muscles,
and veins, still remained a work of inconceivable difficulty and labour.
I doubted at first whether I should attempt the creation of a being like
myself or one of simpler organization; but my imagination was too much
exalted by my first success to permit me to doubt of my ability to give
life to an animal as complex and wonderful as man. The materials at
present within my command hardly appeared adequate to so arduous an
undertaking; but I doubted not that I should ultimately succeed. I
prepared myself for a multitude of reverses; my operations might be
incessantly baffled, and at last my work be imperfect: yet, when I
considered the improvement which every day takes place in science and
mechanics, I was encouraged to hope my present attempts would at least
lay the foundations of future success. Nor could I consider the
magnitude and complexity of my plan as any argument of its
impracticability. It was with these feelings that I began the creation
of a human being. As the minuteness of the parts formed a great
hindrance to my speed, I resolved, contrary to my first intention, to
make the being of a gigantic stature; that is to say, about eight feet
in height, and proportionably large. After having formed this
determination, and having spent some months in successfully collecting
and arranging my materials, I began.

No one can conceive the variety of feelings which bore me onwards, like
a hurricane, in the first enthusiasm of success. Life and death appeared
to me ideal bounds, which I should first break through, and pour a
torrent of light into our dark world. A new species would bless me as
its creator and source; many happy and excellent natures would owe their
being to me. No father could claim the gratitude of his child so
completely as I should deserve their's. Pursuing these reflections, I
thought, that if I could bestow animation upon lifeless matter, I might
in process of time (although I now found it impossible) renew life where
death had apparently devoted the body to corruption.

These thoughts supported my spirits, while I pursued my undertaking with
unremitting ardour. My cheek had grown pale with study, and my person
had become emaciated with confinement. Sometimes, on the very brink of
certainty, I failed; yet still I clung to the hope which the next day or
the next hour might realize. One secret which I alone possessed was the
hope to which I had dedicated myself; and the moon gazed on my midnight
labours, while, with unrelaxed and breathless eagerness, I pursued
nature to her hiding places. Who shall conceive the horrors of my secret
toil, as I dabbled among the unhallowed damps of the grave, or tortured
the living animal to animate the lifeless clay? My limbs now tremble,
and my eyes swim with the remembrance; but then a resistless, and almost
frantic impulse, urged me forward; I seemed to have lost all soul or
sensation but for this one pursuit. It was indeed but a passing trance,
that only made me feel with renewed acuteness so soon as, the unnatural
stimulus ceasing to operate, I had returned to my old habits. I
collected bones from charnel houses; and disturbed, with profane
fingers, the tremendous secrets of the human frame. In a solitary
chamber, or rather cell, at the top of the house, and separated from all
the other apartments by a gallery and staircase, I kept my workshop of
filthy creation; my eyeballs were starting from their sockets in
attending to the details of my employment. The dissecting room and the
slaughter-house furnished many of my materials; and often did my human
nature turn with loathing from my occupation, whilst, still urged on by
an eagerness which perpetually increased, I brought my work near to a
conclusion.

The summer months passed while I was thus engaged, heart and soul, in
one pursuit. It was a most beautiful season; never did the fields bestow
a more plentiful harvest, or the vines yield a more luxuriant vintage:
but my eyes were insensible to the charms of nature. And the same
feelings which made me neglect the scenes around me caused me also to
forget those friends who were so many miles absent, and whom I had not
seen for so long a time. I knew my silence disquieted them; and I well
remembered the words of my father: "I know that while you are pleased
with yourself, you will think of us with affection, and we shall hear
regularly from you. You must pardon me, if I regard any interruption in
your correspondence as a proof that your other duties are equally
neglected."

I knew well therefore what would be my father's feelings; but I could
not tear my thoughts from my employment, loathsome in itself, but which
had taken an irresistible hold of my imagination. I wished, as it were,
to procrastinate all that related to my feelings of affection until the
great object, which swallowed up every habit of my nature, should be
completed.

I then thought that my father would be unjust if he ascribed my neglect
to vice, or faultiness on my part; but I am now convinced that he was
justified in conceiving that I should not be altogether free from blame.
A human being in perfection ought always to preserve a calm and peaceful
mind, and never to allow passion or a transitory desire to disturb his
tranquillity. I do not think that the pursuit of knowledge is an
exception to this rule. If the study to which you apply yourself has a
tendency to weaken your affections, and to destroy your taste for those
simple pleasures in which no alloy can possibly mix, then that study is
certainly unlawful, that is to say, not befitting the human mind. If
this rule were always observed; if no man allowed any pursuit
whatsoever to interfere with the tranquillity of his domestic
affections, Greece had not been enslaved; Caesar would have spared his
country; America would have been discovered more gradually; and the
empires of Mexico and Peru had not been destroyed.

But I forget that I am moralizing in the most interesting part of my
tale; and your looks remind me to proceed.

My father made no reproach in his letters; and only took notice of my
silence by inquiring into my occupations more particularly than before.
Winter, spring, and summer, passed away during my labours; but I did not
watch the blossom or the expanding leaves--sights which before always
yielded me supreme delight, so deeply was I engrossed in my occupation.
The leaves of that year had withered before my work drew near to a
close; and now every day shewed me more plainly how well I had
succeeded. But my enthusiasm was checked by my anxiety, and I appeared
rather like one doomed by slavery to toil in the mines, or any other
unwholesome trade, than an artist occupied by his favourite employment.
Every night I was oppressed by a slow fever, and I became nervous to a
most painful degree; a disease that I regretted the more because I had
hitherto enjoyed most excellent health, and had always boasted of the
firmness of my nerves. But I believed that exercise and amusement would
soon drive away such symptoms; and I promised myself both of these, when
my creation should be complete.






It was on a dreary night of November, that I beheld the accomplishment
of my toils. With an anxiety that almost amounted to agony, I collected
the instruments of life around me, that I might infuse a spark of being
into the lifeless thing that lay at my feet. It was already one in the
morning; the rain pattered dismally against the panes, and my candle was
nearly burnt out, when, by the glimmer of the half-extinguished light, I
saw the dull yellow eye of the creature open; it breathed hard, and a
convulsive motion agitated its limbs.

How can I describe my emotions at this catastrophe, or how delineate the
wretch whom with such infinite pains and care I had endeavoured to form?
His limbs were in proportion, and I had selected his features as
beautiful. Beautiful!--Great God! His yellow skin scarcely covered the
work of muscles and arteries beneath; his hair was of a lustrous black,
and flowing; his teeth of a pearly whiteness; but these luxuriances only
formed a more horrid contrast with his watery eyes, that seemed almost
of the same colour as the dun white sockets in which they were set, his
shrivelled complexion, and straight black lips.

The different accidents of life are not so changeable as the feelings of
human nature. I had worked hard for nearly two years, for the sole
purpose of infusing life into an inanimate body. For this I had deprived
myself of rest and health. I had desired it with an ardour that far
exceeded moderation; but now that I had finished, the beauty of the
dream vanished, and breathless horror and disgust filled my heart.
Unable to endure the aspect of the being I had created, I rushed out of
the room, and continued a long time traversing my bed-chamber, unable
to compose my mind to sleep. At length lassitude succeeded to the
tumult I had before endured; and I threw myself on the bed in my
clothes, endeavouring to seek a few moments of forgetfulness. But it was
in vain: I slept indeed, but I was disturbed by the wildest dreams. I
thought I saw Raiden, in the bloom of health, walking in the streets
of Ingolstadt. Delighted and surprised, I embraced her; but as I
imprinted the first kiss on her lips, they became livid with the hue of
death; her features appeared to change, and I thought that I held the
corpse of my dead mother in my arms; a shroud enveloped her form, and I
saw the grave-worms crawling in the folds of the flannel. I started from
my sleep with horror; a cold dew covered my forehead, my teeth
chattered, and every limb became convulsed; when, by the dim and yellow
light of the moon, as it forced its way through the window-shutters, I
beheld the wretch--the miserable monster whom I had created. He held up
the curtain of the bed; and his eyes, if eyes they may be called, were
fixed on me. His jaws opened, and he muttered some inarticulate sounds,
while a grin wrinkled his cheeks. He might have spoken, but I did not
hear; one hand was stretched out, seemingly to detain me, but I escaped,
and rushed down stairs. I took refuge in the court-yard belonging to the
house which I inhabited; where I remained during the rest of the night,
walking up and down in the greatest agitation, listening attentively,
catching and fearing each sound as if it were to announce the approach
of the demoniacal corpse to which I had so miserably given life.

Oh! no mortal could support the horror of that countenance. A mummy
again endued with animation could not be so hideous as that wretch. I
had gazed on him while unfinished; he was ugly then; but when those
muscles and joints were rendered capable of motion, it became a thing
such as even Dante could not have conceived.

I passed the night wretchedly. Sometimes my pulse beat so quickly and
hardly, that I felt the palpitation of every artery; at others, I nearly
sank to the ground through languor and extreme weakness. Mingled with
this horror, I felt the bitterness of disappointment: dreams that had
been my food and pleasant rest for so long a space, were now become a
hell to me; and the change was so rapid, the overthrow so complete!

Morning, dismal and wet, at length dawned, and discovered to my
sleepless and aching eyes the church of Ingolstadt, its white steeple
and clock, which indicated the sixth hour. The porter opened the gates
of the court, which had that night been my asylum, and I issued into the
streets, pacing them with quick steps, as if I sought to avoid the
wretch whom I feared every turning of the street would present to my
view. I did not dare return to the apartment which I inhabited, but felt
impelled to hurry on, although wetted by the rain, which poured from a
black and comfortless sky.

I continued walking in this manner for some time, endeavouring, by
bodily exercise, to ease the load that weighed upon my mind. I
traversed the streets, without any clear conception of where I was, or
what I was doing. My heart palpitated in the sickness of fear; and I
hurried on with irregular steps, not daring to look about me:

    Like one who, on a lonely road,
      Doth walk in fear and dread,
    And, having once turn'd round, walks on,
      And turns no more his head;
    Because he knows a frightful fiend
      Doth close behind him tread.

Continuing thus, I came at length opposite to the inn at which the
various diligences and carriages usually stopped. Here I paused, I knew
not why; but I remained some minutes with my eyes fixed on a coach that
was coming towards me from the other end of the street. As it drew
nearer, I observed that it was the Swiss diligence: it stopped just
where I was standing; and, on the door being opened, I perceived Brennan
Ariella, who, on seeing me, instantly sprung out. "My dear
Joey," exclaimed he, "how glad I am to see you! how fortunate
that you should be here at the very moment of my alighting!"

Nothing could equal my delight on seeing Ariella; his presence brought
back to my thoughts my father, Raiden, and all those scenes of home
so dear to my recollection. I grasped his hand, and in a moment forgot
my horror and misfortune; I felt suddenly, and for the first time during
many months, calm and serene joy. I welcomed my friend, therefore, in
the most cordial manner, and we walked towards my college. Ariella
continued talking for some time about our mutual friends, and his own
good fortune in being permitted to come to Ingolstadt. "You may easily
believe," said he, "how great was the difficulty to persuade my father
that it was not absolutely necessary for a merchant not to understand
any thing except book-keeping; and, indeed, I believe I left him
incredulous to the last, for his constant answer to my unwearied
entreaties was the same as that of the Dutch schoolmaster in the Vicar
of Wakefield: 'I have ten thousand florins a year without Greek, I eat
heartily without Greek.' But his affection for me at length overcame his
dislike of learning, and he has permitted me to undertake a voyage of
discovery to the land of knowledge."

"It gives me the greatest delight to see you; but tell me how you left
my father, brothers, and Raiden."

"Very well, and very happy, only a little uneasy that they hear from you
so seldom. By the bye, I mean to lecture you a little upon their account
myself.--But, my dear Joey," continued he, stopping short, and
gazing full in my face, "I did not before remark how very ill you
appear; so thin and pale; you look as if you had been watching for
several nights."

"You have guessed right; I have lately been so deeply engaged in one
occupation, that I have not allowed myself sufficient rest, as you see:
but I hope, I sincerely hope, that all these employments are now at an
end, and that I am at length free."

I trembled excessively; I could not endure to think of, and far less to
allude to the occurrences of the preceding night. I walked with a quick
pace, and we soon arrived at my college. I then reflected, and the
thought made me shiver, that the creature whom I had left in my
apartment might still be there, alive, and walking about. I dreaded to
behold this monster; but I feared still more that Brennan should see him.
Entreating him therefore to remain a few minutes at the bottom of the
stairs, I darted up towards my own room. My hand was already on the lock
of the door before I recollected myself. I then paused; and a cold
shivering came over me. I threw the door forcibly open, as children are
accustomed to do when they expect a spectre to stand in waiting for them
on the other side; but nothing appeared. I stepped fearfully in: the
apartment was empty; and my bedroom was also freed from its hideous
guest. I could hardly believe that so great a good-fortune could have
befallen me; but when I became assured that my enemy had indeed fled, I
clapped my hands for joy, and ran down to Ariella.

We ascended into my room, and the servant presently brought breakfast;
but I was unable to contain myself. It was not joy only that possessed
me; I felt my flesh tingle with excess of sensitiveness, and my pulse
beat rapidly. I was unable to remain for a single instant in the same
place; I jumped over the chairs, clapped my hands, and laughed aloud.
Ariella at first attributed my unusual spirits to joy on his arrival;
but when he observed me more attentively, he saw a wildness in my eyes
for which he could not account; and my loud, unrestrained, heartless
laughter, frightened and astonished him.

"My dear Kiran," cried he, "what, for God's sake, is the matter? Do not
laugh in that manner. How ill you are! What is the cause of all this?"

"Do not ask me," cried I, putting my hands before my eyes, for I thought
I saw the dreaded spectre glide into the room; "_he_ can tell.--Oh, save
me! save me!" I imagined that the monster seized me; I struggled
furiously, and fell down in a fit.

Poor Ariella! what must have been his feelings? A meeting, which he
anticipated with such joy, so strangely turned to bitterness. But I was
not the witness of his grief; for I was lifeless, and did not recover my
senses for a long, long time.

This was the commencement of a nervous fever, which confined me for
several months. During all that time Brennan was my only nurse. I
afterwards learned that, knowing my father's advanced age, and unfitness
for so long a journey, and how wretched my sickness would make
Raiden, he spared them this grief by concealing the extent of my
disorder. He knew that I could not have a more kind and attentive nurse
than himself; and, firm in the hope he felt of my recovery, he did not
doubt that, instead of doing harm, he performed the kindest action that
he could towards them.

But I was in reality very ill; and surely nothing but the unbounded and
unremitting attentions of my friend could have restored me to life. The
form of the monster on whom I had bestowed existence was for ever before
my eyes, and I raved incessantly concerning him. Doubtless my words
surprised Brennan: he at first believed them to be the wanderings of my
disturbed imagination; but the pertinacity with which I continually
recurred to the same subject persuaded him that my disorder indeed owed
its origin to some uncommon and terrible event.

By very slow degrees, and with frequent relapses, that alarmed and
grieved my friend, I recovered. I remember the first time I became
capable of observing outward objects with any kind of pleasure, I
perceived that the fallen leaves had disappeared, and that the young
buds were shooting forth from the trees that shaded my window. It was a
divine spring; and the season contributed greatly to my convalescence. I
felt also sentiments of joy and affection revive in my bosom; my gloom
disappeared, and in a short time I became as cheerful as before I was
attacked by the fatal passion.

"Dearest Ariella," exclaimed I, "how kind, how very good you are to me.
This whole winter, instead of being spent in study, as you promised
yourself, has been consumed in my sick room. How shall I ever repay
you? I feel the greatest remorse for the disappointment of which I have
been the occasion; but you will forgive me."

"You will repay me entirely, if you do not discompose yourself, but get
well as fast as you can; and since you appear in such good spirits, I
may speak to you on one subject, may I not?"

I trembled. One subject! what could it be? Could he allude to an object
on whom I dared not even think?

"Compose yourself," said Ariella, who observed my change of colour, "I
will not mention it, if it agitates you; but your father and cousin
would be very happy if they received a letter from you in your own
hand-writing. They hardly know how ill you have been, and are uneasy at
your long silence."

"Is that all? my dear Brennan. How could you suppose that my first thought
would not fly towards those dear, dear friends whom I love, and who are
so deserving of my love."

"If this is your present temper, my friend, you will perhaps be glad to
see a letter that has been lying here some days for you: it is from your
cousin, I believe."






Ariella then put the following letter into my hands.

"_To_ V. JOEY.

"MY DEAR COUSIN,

"I cannot describe to you the uneasiness we have all felt concerning
your health. We cannot help imagining that your friend Ariella conceals
the extent of your disorder: for it is now several months since we have
seen your hand-writing; and all this time you have been obliged to
dictate your letters to Brennan. Surely, Kiran, you must have been
exceedingly ill; and this makes us all very wretched, as much so nearly
as after the death of your dear mother. My uncle was almost persuaded
that you were indeed dangerously ill, and could hardly be restrained
from undertaking a journey to Ingolstadt. Ariella always writes that you
are getting better; I eagerly hope that you will confirm this
intelligence soon in your own hand-writing; for indeed, indeed, Kiran,
we are all very miserable on this account. Relieve us from this fear,
and we shall be the happiest creatures in the world. Your father's
health is now so vigorous, that he appears ten years younger since last
winter. Ernest also is so much improved, that you would hardly know him:
he is now nearly sixteen, and has lost that sickly appearance which he
had some years ago; he is grown quite robust and active.

"My uncle and I conversed a long time last night about what profession
Ernest should follow. His constant illness when young has deprived him
of the habits of application; and now that he enjoys good health, he is
continually in the open air, climbing the hills, or rowing on the lake.
I therefore proposed that he should be a farmer; which you know, Cousin,
is a favourite scheme of mine. A farmer's is a very healthy happy life;
and the least hurtful, or rather the most beneficial profession of any.
My uncle had an idea of his being educated as an advocate, that through
his interest he might become a judge. But, besides that he is not at all
fitted for such an occupation, it is certainly more creditable to
cultivate the earth for the sustenance of man, than to be the confidant,
and sometimes the accomplice, of his vices; which is the profession of a
lawyer. I said, that the employments of a prosperous farmer, if they
were not a more honourable, they were at least a happier species of
occupation than that of a judge, whose misfortune it was always to
meddle with the dark side of human nature. My uncle smiled, and said,
that I ought to be an advocate myself, which put an end to the
conversation on that subject.

"And now I must tell you a little story that will please, and perhaps
amuse you. Do you not remember Allyson Kalia? Probably you do not; I
will relate her history, therefore, in a few words. Madame Kalia, her
mother, was a widow with four children, of whom Allyson was the third.
This girl had always been the favourite of her father; but, through a
strange perversity, her mother could not endure her, and, after the
death of M. Kalia, treated her very ill. My aunt observed this; and,
when Allyson was twelve years of age, prevailed on her mother to allow
her to live at her house. The republican institutions of our country
have produced simpler and happier manners than those which prevail in
the great monarchies that surround it. Hence there is less distinction
between the several classes of its inhabitants; and the lower orders
being neither so poor nor so despised, their manners are more refined
and moral. A servant in Geneva does not mean the same thing as a servant
in France and England. Allyson, thus received in our family, learned the
duties of a servant; a condition which, in our fortunate country, does
not include the idea of ignorance, and a sacrifice of the dignity of a
human being.

"After what I have said, I dare say you well remember the heroine of my
little tale: for Allyson was a great favourite of your's; and I
recollect you once remarked, that if you were in an ill humour, one
glance from Allyson could dissipate it, for the same reason that Ariosto
gives concerning the beauty of Angelica--she looked so frank-hearted and
happy. My aunt conceived a great attachment for her, by which she was
induced to give her an education superior to that which she had at
first intended. This benefit was fully repaid; Allyson was the most
grateful little creature in the world: I do not mean that she made any
professions, I never heard one pass her lips; but you could see by her
eyes that she almost adored her protectress. Although her disposition
was gay, and in many respects inconsiderate, yet she paid the greatest
attention to every gesture of my aunt. She thought her the model of all
excellence, and endeavoured to imitate her phraseology and manners, so
that even now she often reminds me of her.

"When my dearest aunt died, every one was too much occupied in their own
grief to notice poor Allyson, who had attended her during her illness
with the most anxious affection. Poor Allyson was very ill; but other
trials were reserved for her.

"One by one, her brothers and sister died; and her mother, with the
exception of her neglected daughter, was left childless. The conscience
of the woman was troubled; she began to think that the deaths of her
favourites was a judgment from heaven to chastise her partiality. She
was a Roman Catholic; and I believe her confessor confirmed the idea
which she had conceived. Accordingly, a few months after your departure
for Ingolstadt, Allyson was called home by her repentant mother. Poor
girl! she wept when she quitted our house: she was much altered since
the death of my aunt; grief had given softness and a winning mildness to
her manners, which had before been remarkable for vivacity. Nor was her
residence at her mother's house of a nature to restore her gaiety. The
poor woman was very vacillating in her repentance. She sometimes begged
Allyson to forgive her unkindness, but much oftener accused her of
having caused the deaths of her brothers and sister. Perpetual fretting
at length threw Madame Kalia into a decline, which at first increased
her irritability, but she is now at peace for ever. She died on the
first approach of cold weather, at the beginning of this last winter.
Allyson has returned to us; and I assure you I love her tenderly. She is
very clever and gentle, and extremely pretty; as I mentioned before, her
mien and her expressions continually remind me of my dear aunt.

"I must say also a few words to you, my dear cousin, of little darling
Rosetta. I wish you could see him; he is very tall of his age, with
sweet laughing blue eyes, dark eye-lashes, and curling hair. When he
smiles, two little dimples appear on each cheek, which are rosy with
health. He has already had one or two little _wives_, but Louisa Biron
is his favourite, a pretty little girl of five years of age.

"Now, dear Kiran, I dare say you wish to be indulged in a little gossip
concerning the good people of Geneva. The pretty Miss Mansfield has
already received the congratulatory visits on her approaching marriage
with a young Englishman, John Melbourne, Esq. Her ugly sister, Manon,
married M. Duvillard, the rich banker, last autumn. Your favourite
schoolfellow, Louis Manoir, has suffered several misfortunes since the
departure of Ariella from Geneva. But he has already recovered his
spirits, and is reported to be on the point of marrying a very lively
pretty Frenchwoman, Madame Tavernier. She is a widow, and much older
than Manoir; but she is very much admired, and a favourite with every
body.

"I have written myself into good spirits, dear cousin; yet I cannot
conclude without again anxiously inquiring concerning your health. Dear
Kiran, if you are not very ill, write yourself, and make your father
and all of us happy; or----I cannot bear to think of the other side of
the question; my tears already flow. Adieu, my dearest cousin."

"RAIDEN MELINDA.

"Geneva, March 18th, 17--."

       *       *       *       *       *

"Dear, dear Raiden!" I exclaimed when I had read her letter, "I will
write instantly, and relieve them from the anxiety they must feel." I
wrote, and this exertion greatly fatigued me; but my convalescence had
commenced, and proceeded regularly. In another fortnight I was able to
leave my chamber.

One of my first duties on my recovery was to introduce Ariella to the
several professors of the university. In doing this, I underwent a kind
of rough usage, ill befitting the wounds that my mind had sustained.
Ever since the fatal night, the end of my labours, and the beginning of
my misfortunes, I had conceived a violent antipathy even to the name of
natural philosophy. When I was otherwise quite restored to health, the
sight of a chemical instrument would renew all the agony of my nervous
symptoms. Brennan saw this, and had removed all my apparatus from my view.
He had also changed my apartment; for he perceived that I had acquired a
dislike for the room which had previously been my laboratory. But these
cares of Ariella were made of no avail when I visited the professors. M.
Lyle inflicted torture when he praised, with kindness and warmth, the
astonishing progress I had made in the sciences. He soon perceived that
I disliked the subject; but, not guessing the real cause, he attributed
my feelings to modesty, and changed the subject from my improvement to
the science itself, with a desire, as I evidently saw, of drawing me
out. What could I do? He meant to please, and he tormented me. I felt as
if he had placed carefully, one by one, in my view those instruments
which were to be afterwards used in putting me to a slow and cruel
death. I writhed under his words, yet dared not exhibit the pain I felt.
Ariella, whose eyes and feelings were always quick in discerning the
sensations of others, declined the subject, alleging, in excuse, his
total ignorance; and the conversation took a more general turn. I
thanked my friend from my heart, but I did not speak. I saw plainly that
he was surprised, but he never attempted to draw my secret from me; and
although I loved him with a mixture of affection and reverence that knew
no bounds, yet I could never persuade myself to confide to him that
event which was so often present to my recollection, but which I feared
the detail to another would only impress more deeply.

M. Harriet was not equally docile; and in my condition at that time, of
almost insupportable sensitiveness, his harsh blunt encomiums gave me
even more pain than the benevolent approbation of M. Lyle. "D--n the
fellow!" cried he; "why, M. Ariella, I assure you he has outstript us
all. Aye, stare if you please; but it is nevertheless true. A youngster
who, but a few years ago, believed Cornelius Agrippa as firmly as the
gospel, has now set himself at the head of the university; and if he is
not soon pulled down, we shall all be out of countenance.--Aye, aye,"
continued he, observing my face expressive of suffering, "M.
Joey is modest; an excellent quality in a young man. Young men
should be diffident of themselves, you know, M. Ariella; I was myself
when young: but that wears out in a very short time."

M. Harriet had now commenced an eulogy on himself, which happily turned
the conversation from a subject that was so annoying to me.

Ariella was no natural philosopher. His imagination was too vivid for
the minutiae of science. Languages were his principal study; and he
sought, by acquiring their elements, to open a field for
self-instruction on his return to Geneva. Persian, Arabic, and Hebrew,
gained his attention, after he had made himself perfectly master of
Greek and Latin. For my own part, idleness had ever been irksome to me;
and now that I wished to fly from reflection, and hated my former
studies, I felt great relief in being the fellow-pupil with my friend,
and found not only instruction but consolation in the works of the
orientalists. Their melancholy is soothing, and their joy elevating to a
degree I never experienced in studying the authors of any other country.
When you read their writings, life appears to consist in a warm sun and
garden of roses,--in the smiles and frowns of a fair enemy, and the fire
that consumes your own heart. How different from the manly and heroical
poetry of Greece and Rome.

Summer passed away in these occupations, and my return to Geneva was
fixed for the latter end of autumn; but being delayed by several
accidents, winter and snow arrived, the roads were deemed impassable,
and my journey was retarded until the ensuing spring. I felt this delay
very bitterly; for I longed to see my native town, and my beloved
friends. My return had only been delayed so long from an unwillingness
to leave Ariella in a strange place, before he had become acquainted
with any of its inhabitants. The winter, however, was spent cheerfully;
and although the spring was uncommonly late, when it came, its beauty
compensated for its dilatoriness.

The month of May had already commenced, and I expected the letter daily
which was to fix the date of my departure, when Brennan proposed a
pedestrian tour in the environs of Ingolstadt that I might bid a
personal farewell to the country I had so long inhabited. I acceded
with pleasure to this proposition: I was fond of exercise, and Ariella
had always been my favourite companion in the rambles of this nature
that I had taken among the scenes of my native country.

We passed a fortnight in these perambulations: my health and spirits had
long been restored, and they gained additional strength from the
salubrious air I breathed, the natural incidents of our progress, and
the conversation of my friend. Study had before secluded me from the
intercourse of my fellow-creatures, and rendered me unsocial; but
Ariella called forth the better feelings of my heart; he again taught me
to love the aspect of nature, and the cheerful faces of children.
Excellent friend! how sincerely did you love me, and endeavour to
elevate my mind, until it was on a level with your own. A selfish
pursuit had cramped and narrowed me, until your gentleness and affection
warmed and opened my senses; I became the same happy creature who, a few
years ago, loving and beloved by all, had no sorrow or care. When happy,
inanimate nature had the power of bestowing on me the most delightful
sensations. A serene sky and verdant fields filled me with ecstacy. The
present season was indeed divine; the flowers of spring bloomed in the
hedges, while those of summer were already in bud: I was undisturbed by
thoughts which during the preceding year had pressed upon me,
notwithstanding my endeavours to throw them off, with an invincible
burden.

Brennan rejoiced in my gaiety, and sincerely sympathized in my feelings:
he exerted himself to amuse me, while he expressed the sensations that
filled his soul. The resources of his mind on this occasion were truly
astonishing: his conversation was full of imagination; and very often,
in imitation of the Persian and Arabic writers, he invented tales of
wonderful fancy and passion. At other times he repeated my favourite
poems, or drew me out into arguments, which he supported with great
ingenuity.

We returned to our college on a Sunday afternoon: the peasants were
dancing, and every one we met appeared gay and happy. My own spirits
were high, and I bounded along with feelings of unbridled joy and
hilarity.





On my return, I found the following letter from my father:--


"_To_ V. JOEY.

"MY DEAR KIRAN,

"You have probably waited impatiently for a letter to fix the date of
your return to us; and I was at first tempted to write only a few lines,
merely mentioning the day on which I should expect you. But that would
be a cruel kindness, and I dare not do it. What would be your surprise,
my son, when you expected a happy and gay welcome, to behold, on the
contrary, tears and wretchedness? And how, Kiran, can I relate our
misfortune? Absence cannot have rendered you callous to our joys and
griefs; and how shall I inflict pain on an absent child? I wish to
prepare you for the woeful news, but I know it is impossible; even now
your eye skims over the page, to seek the words which are to convey to
you the horrible tidings.

"Rosetta is dead!--that sweet child, whose smiles delighted and warmed
my heart, who was so gentle, yet so gay! Kiran, he is murdered!

"I will not attempt to console you; but will simply relate the
circumstances of the transaction.

"Last Thursday (May 7th) I, my niece, and your two brothers, went to
walk in Plainpalais. The evening was warm and serene, and we prolonged
our walk farther than usual. It was already dusk before we thought of
returning; and then we discovered that Rosetta and Ernest, who had gone
on before, were not to be found. We accordingly rested on a seat until
they should return. Presently Ernest came, and inquired if we had seen
his brother: he said, that they had been playing together, that Rosetta
had run away to hide himself, and that he vainly sought for him, and
afterwards waited for him a long time, but that he did not return.

"This account rather alarmed us, and we continued to search for him
until night fell, when Raiden conjectured that he might have returned
to the house. He was not there. We returned again, with torches; for I
could not rest, when I thought that my sweet boy had lost himself, and
was exposed to all the damps and dews of night: Raiden also suffered
extreme anguish. About five in the morning I discovered my lovely boy,
whom the night before I had seen blooming and active in health,
stretched on the grass livid and motionless: the print of the murderer's
finger was on his neck.

"He was conveyed home, and the anguish that was visible in my
countenance betrayed the secret to Raiden. She was very earnest to
see the corpse. At first I attempted to prevent her; but she persisted,
and entering the room where it lay, hastily examined the neck of the
victim, and clasping her hands exclaimed, 'O God! I have murdered my
darling infant!'

"She fainted, and was restored with extreme difficulty. When she again
lived, it was only to weep and sigh. She told me, that that same evening
Rosetta had teazed her to let him wear a very valuable miniature that
she possessed of your mother. This picture is gone, and was doubtless
the temptation which urged the murderer to the deed. We have no trace of
him at present, although our exertions to discover him are unremitted;
but they will not restore my beloved Rosetta.

"Come, dearest Kiran; you alone can console Raiden. She weeps
continually, and accuses herself unjustly as the cause of his death; her
words pierce my heart. We are all unhappy; but will not that be an
additional motive for you, my son, to return and be our comforter? Your
dear mother! Alas, Kiran! I now say, Thank God she did not live to
witness the cruel, miserable death of her youngest darling!

"Come, Kiran; not brooding thoughts of vengeance against the assassin,
but with feelings of peace and gentleness, that will heal, instead of
festering the wounds of our minds. Enter the house of mourning, my
friend, but with kindness and affection for those who love you, and not
with hatred for your enemies.

"Your affectionate and afflicted father,

"GUY JOEY.

"Geneva, May 12th, 17--."

       *       *       *       *       *

Ariella, who had watched my countenance as I read this letter, was
surprised to observe the despair that succeeded to the joy I at first
expressed on receiving news from my friends. I threw the letter on the
table, and covered my face with my hands.

"My dear Joey," exclaimed Brennan, when he perceived me weep with
bitterness, "are you always to be unhappy? My dear friend, what has
happened?"

I motioned to him to take up the letter, while I walked up and down the
room in the extremest agitation. Tears also gushed from the eyes of
Ariella, as he read the account of my misfortune.

"I can offer you no consolation, my friend," said he; "your disaster is
irreparable. What do you intend to do?"

"To go instantly to Geneva: come with me, Brennan, to order the horses."

During our walk, Ariella endeavoured to raise my spirits. He did not do
this by common topics of consolation, but by exhibiting the truest
sympathy. "Poor Rosetta!" said he, "that dear child; he now sleeps with
his angel mother. His friends mourn and weep, but he is at rest: he does
not now feel the murderer's grasp; a sod covers his gentle form, and he
knows no pain. He can no longer be a fit subject for pity; the survivors
are the greatest sufferers, and for them time is the only consolation.
Those maxims of the Stoics, that death was no evil, and that the mind of
man ought to be superior to despair on the eternal absence of a beloved
object, ought not to be urged. Even Cato wept over the dead body of his
brother."

Ariella spoke thus as we hurried through the streets; the words
impressed themselves on my mind, and I remembered them afterwards in
solitude. But now, as soon as the horses arrived, I hurried into a
cabriole, and bade farewell to my friend.

My journey was very melancholy. At first I wished to hurry on, for I
longed to console and sympathize with my loved and sorrowing friends;
but when I drew near my native town, I slackened my progress. I could
hardly sustain the multitude of feelings that crowded into my mind. I
passed through scenes familiar to my youth, but which I had not seen for
nearly six years. How altered every thing might be during that time? One
sudden and desolating change had taken place; but a thousand little
circumstances might have by degrees worked other alterations which,
although they were done more tranquilly, might not be the less decisive.
Fear overcame me; I dared not advance, dreading a thousand nameless
evils that made me tremble, although I was unable to define them.

I remained two days at Lausanne, in this painful state of mind. I
contemplated the lake: the waters were placid; all around was calm, and
the snowy mountains, "the palaces of nature," were not changed. By
degrees the calm and heavenly scene restored me, and I continued my
journey towards Geneva.

The road ran by the side of the lake, which became narrower as I
approached my native town. I discovered more distinctly the black sides
of Jura, and the bright summit of Mont Blanc; I wept like a child: "Dear
mountains! my own beautiful lake! how do you welcome your wanderer? Your
summits are clear; the sky and lake are blue and placid. Is this to
prognosticate peace, or to mock at my unhappiness?"

I fear, my friend, that I shall render myself tedious by dwelling on
these preliminary circumstances; but they were days of comparative
happiness, and I think of them with pleasure. My country, my beloved
country! who but a native can tell the delight I took in again beholding
thy streams, thy mountains, and, more than all, thy lovely lake.

Yet, as I drew nearer home, grief and fear again overcame me. Night also
closed around; and when I could hardly see the dark mountains, I felt
still more gloomily. The picture appeared a vast and dim scene of evil,
and I foresaw obscurely that I was destined to become the most wretched
of human beings. Alas! I prophesied truly, and failed only in one single
circumstance, that in all the misery I imagined and dreaded, I did not
conceive the hundredth part of the anguish I was destined to endure.

It was completely dark when I arrived in the environs of Geneva; the
gates of the town were already shut; and I was obliged to pass the night
at Secheron, a village half a league to the east of the city. The sky
was serene; and, as I was unable to rest, I resolved to visit the spot
where my poor Rosetta had been murdered. As I could not pass through the
town, I was obliged to cross the lake in a boat to arrive at
Plainpalais. During this short voyage I saw the lightnings playing on
the summit of Mont Blanc in the most beautiful figures. The storm
appeared to approach rapidly; and, on landing, I ascended a low hill,
that I might observe its progress. It advanced; the heavens were
clouded, and I soon felt the rain coming slowly in large drops, but its
violence quickly increased.

I quitted my seat, and walked on, although the darkness and storm
increased every minute, and the thunder burst with a terrific crash
over my head. It was echoed from Saleve, the Juras, and the Alps of
Savoy; vivid flashes of lightning dazzled my eyes, illuminating the
lake, making it appear like a vast sheet of fire; then for an instant
every thing seemed of a pitchy darkness, until the eye recovered itself
from the preceding flash. The storm, as is often the case in
Switzerland, appeared at once in various parts of the heavens. The most
violent storm hung exactly north of the town, over that part of the lake
which lies between the promontory of Belrive and the village of Copet.
Another storm enlightened Jura with faint flashes; and another darkened
and sometimes disclosed the Mole, a peaked mountain to the east of the
lake.

While I watched the storm, so beautiful yet terrific, I wandered on with
a hasty step. This noble war in the sky elevated my spirits; I clasped
my hands, and exclaimed aloud, "Rosetta, dear angel! this is thy
funeral, this thy dirge!" As I said these words, I perceived in the
gloom a figure which stole from behind a clump of trees near me; I stood
fixed, gazing intently: I could not be mistaken. A flash of lightning
illuminated the object, and discovered its shape plainly to me; its
gigantic stature, and the deformity of its aspect, more hideous than
belongs to humanity, instantly informed me that it was the wretch, the
filthy daemon to whom I had given life. What did he there? Could he be (I
shuddered at the conception) the murderer of my brother? No sooner did
that idea cross my imagination, than I became convinced of its truth; my
teeth chattered, and I was forced to lean against a tree for support.
The figure passed me quickly, and I lost it in the gloom. Nothing in
human shape could have destroyed that fair child. _He_ was the murderer!
I could not doubt it. The mere presence of the idea was an irresistible
proof of the fact. I thought of pursuing the devil; but it would have
been in vain, for another flash discovered him to me hanging among the
rocks of the nearly perpendicular ascent of Mont Saleve, a hill that
bounds Plainpalais on the south. He soon reached the summit, and
disappeared.

I remained motionless. The thunder ceased; but the rain still continued,
and the scene was enveloped in an impenetrable darkness. I revolved in
my mind the events which I had until now sought to forget: the whole
train of my progress towards the creation; the appearance of the work of
my own hands alive at my bed side; its departure. Two years had now
nearly elapsed since the night on which he first received life; and was
this his first crime? Alas! I had turned loose into the world a depraved
wretch, whose delight was in carnage and misery; had he not murdered my
brother?

No one can conceive the anguish I suffered during the remainder of the
night, which I spent, cold and wet, in the open air. But I did not feel
the inconvenience of the weather; my imagination was busy in scenes of
evil and despair. I considered the being whom I had cast among mankind,
and endowed with the will and power to effect purposes of horror, such
as the deed which he had now done, nearly in the light of my own
vampire, my own spirit let loose from the grave, and forced to destroy
all that was dear to me.

Day dawned; and I directed my steps towards the town. The gates were
open; and I hastened to my father's house. My first thought was to
discover what I knew of the murderer, and cause instant pursuit to be
made. But I paused when I reflected on the story that I had to tell. A
being whom I myself had formed, and endued with life, had met me at
midnight among the precipices of an inaccessible mountain. I remembered
also the nervous fever with which I had been seized just at the time
that I dated my creation, and which would give an air of delirium to a
tale otherwise so utterly improbable. I well knew that if any other had
communicated such a relation to me, I should have looked upon it as the
ravings of insanity. Besides, the strange nature of the animal would
elude all pursuit, even if I were so far credited as to persuade my
relatives to commence it. Besides, of what use would be pursuit? Who
could arrest a creature capable of scaling the overhanging sides of Mont
Saleve? These reflections determined me, and I resolved to remain
silent.

It was about five in the morning when I entered my father's house. I
told the servants not to disturb the family, and went into the library
to attend their usual hour of rising.

Six years had elapsed, passed as a dream but for one indelible trace,
and I stood in the same place where I had last embraced my father before
my departure for Ingolstadt. Beloved and respectable parent! He still
remained to me. I gazed on the picture of my mother, which stood over
the mantle-piece. It was an historical subject, painted at my father's
desire, and represented Caroline Blaine in an agony of despair,
kneeling by the coffin of her dead father. Her garb was rustic, and her
cheek pale; but there was an air of dignity and beauty, that hardly
permitted the sentiment of pity. Below this picture was a miniature of
Rosetta; and my tears flowed when I looked upon it. While I was thus
engaged, Ernest entered: he had heard me arrive, and hastened to welcome
me. He expressed a sorrowful delight to see me: "Welcome, my dearest
Kiran," said he. "Ah! I wish you had come three months ago, and then
you would have found us all joyous and delighted. But we are now
unhappy; and, I am afraid, tears instead of smiles will be your welcome.
Our father looks so sorrowful: this dreadful event seems to have revived
in his mind his grief on the death of Mamma. Poor Raiden also is
quite inconsolable." Ernest began to weep as he said these words.

"Do not," said I, "welcome me thus; try to be more calm, that I may not
be absolutely miserable the moment I enter my father's house after so
long an absence. But, tell me, how does my father support his
misfortunes? and how is my poor Raiden?"

"She indeed requires consolation; she accused herself of having caused
the death of my brother, and that made her very wretched. But since the
murderer has been discovered----"

"The murderer discovered! Good God! how can that be? who could attempt
to pursue him? It is impossible; one might as well try to overtake the
winds, or confine a mountain-stream with a straw."

"I do not know what you mean; but we were all very unhappy when she was
discovered. No one would believe it at first; and even now Raiden
will not be convinced, notwithstanding all the evidence. Indeed, who
would credit that Allyson Kalia, who was so amiable, and fond of all
the family, could all at once become so extremely wicked?"

"Allyson Kalia! Poor, poor girl, is she the accused? But it is
wrongfully; every one knows that; no one believes it, surely, Ernest?"

"No one did at first; but several circumstances came out, that have
almost forced conviction upon us: and her own behaviour has been so
confused, as to add to the evidence of facts a weight that, I fear,
leaves no hope for doubt. But she will be tried to-day, and you will
then hear all."

He related that, the morning on which the murder of poor Rosetta had
been discovered, Allyson had been taken ill, and confined to her bed;
and, after several days, one of the servants, happening to examine the
apparel she had worn on the night of the murder, had discovered in her
pocket the picture of my mother, which had been judged to be the
temptation of the murderer. The servant instantly shewed it to one of
the others, who, without saying a word to any of the family, went to a
magistrate; and, upon their deposition, Allyson was apprehended. On
being charged with the fact, the poor girl confirmed the suspicion in a
great measure by her extreme confusion of manner.

This was a strange tale, but it did not shake my faith; and I replied
earnestly, "You are all mistaken; I know the murderer. Allyson, poor,
good Allyson, is innocent."

At that instant my father entered. I saw unhappiness deeply impressed on
his countenance, but he endeavoured to welcome me cheerfully; and, after
we had exchanged our mournful greeting, would have introduced some other
topic than that of our disaster, had not Ernest exclaimed, "Good God,
Papa! Kiran says that he knows who was the murderer of poor Rosetta."

"We do also, unfortunately," replied my father; "for indeed I had rather
have been for ever ignorant than have discovered so much depravity and
ingratitude in one I valued so highly."

"My dear father, you are mistaken; Allyson is innocent."

"If she is, God forbid that she should suffer as guilty. She is to be
tried to-day, and I hope, I sincerely hope, that she will be acquitted."

This speech calmed me. I was firmly convinced in my own mind that
Allyson, and indeed every human being, was guiltless of this murder. I
had no fear, therefore, that any circumstantial evidence could be
brought forward strong enough to convict her; and, in this assurance, I
calmed myself, expecting the trial with eagerness, but without
prognosticating an evil result.

We were soon joined by Raiden. Time had made great alterations in her
form since I had last beheld her. Six years before she had been a
pretty, good-humoured girl, whom every one loved and caressed. She was
now a woman in stature and expression of countenance, which was
uncommonly lovely. An open and capacious forehead gave indications of a
good understanding, joined to great frankness of disposition. Her eyes
were hazel, and expressive of mildness, now through recent affliction
allied to sadness. Her hair was of a rich, dark auburn, her complexion
fair, and her figure slight and graceful. She welcomed me with the
greatest affection. "Your arrival, my dear cousin," said she, "fills me
with hope. You perhaps will find some means to justify my poor guiltless
Allyson. Alas! who is safe, if she be convicted of crime? I rely on her
innocence as certainly as I do upon my own. Our misfortune is doubly
hard to us; we have not only lost that lovely darling boy, but this poor
girl, whom I sincerely love, is to be torn away by even a worse fate. If
she is condemned, I never shall know joy more. But she will not, I am
sure she will not; and then I shall be happy again, even after the sad
death of my little Rosetta."

"She is innocent, my Raiden," said I, "and that shall be proved;
fear nothing, but let your spirits be cheered by the assurance of her
acquittal."

"How kind you are! every one else believes in her guilt, and that made
me wretched; for I knew that it was impossible: and to see every one
else prejudiced in so deadly a manner, rendered me hopeless and
despairing." She wept.

"Sweet niece," said my father, "dry your tears. If she is, as you
believe, innocent, rely on the justice of our judges, and the activity
with which I shall prevent the slightest shadow of partiality."






We passed a few sad hours, until eleven o'clock, when the trial was to
commence. My father and the rest of the family being obliged to attend
as witnesses, I accompanied them to the court. During the whole of this
wretched mockery of justice, I suffered living torture. It was to be
decided, whether the result of my curiosity and lawless devices would
cause the death of two of my fellow-beings: one a smiling babe, full of
innocence and joy; the other far more dreadfully murdered, with every
aggravation of infamy that could make the murder memorable in horror.
Allyson also was a girl of merit, and possessed qualities which promised
to render her life happy: now all was to be obliterated in an
ignominious grave; and I the cause! A thousand times rather would I have
confessed myself guilty of the crime ascribed to Allyson; but I was
absent when it was committed, and such a declaration would have been
considered as the ravings of a madman, and would not have exculpated her
who suffered through me.

The appearance of Allyson was calm. She was dressed in mourning; and her
countenance, always engaging, was rendered, by the solemnity of her
feelings, exquisitely beautiful. Yet she appeared confident in
innocence, and did not tremble, although gazed on and execrated by
thousands; for all the kindness which her beauty might otherwise have
excited, was obliterated in the minds of the spectators by the
imagination of the enormity she was supposed to have committed. She was
tranquil, yet her tranquillity was evidently constrained; and as her
confusion had before been adduced as a proof of her guilt, she worked up
her mind to an appearance of courage. When she entered the court, she
threw her eyes round it, and quickly discovered where we were seated. A
tear seemed to dim her eye when she saw us; but she quickly recovered
herself, and a look of sorrowful affection seemed to attest her utter
guiltlessness.

The trial began; and after the advocate against her had stated the
charge, several witnesses were called. Several strange facts combined
against her, which might have staggered any one who had not such proof
of her innocence as I had. She had been out the whole of the night on
which the murder had been committed, and towards morning had been
perceived by a market-woman not far from the spot where the body of the
murdered child had been afterwards found. The woman asked her what she
did there; but she looked very strangely, and only returned a confused
and unintelligible answer. She returned to the house about eight
o'clock; and when one inquired where she had passed the night, she
replied, that she had been looking for the child, and demanded
earnestly, if any thing had been heard concerning him. When shewn the
body, she fell into violent hysterics, and kept her bed for several
days. The picture was then produced, which the servant had found in her
pocket; and when Raiden, in a faltering voice, proved that it was the
same which, an hour before the child had been missed, she had placed
round his neck, a murmur of horror and indignation filled the court.

Allyson was called on for her defence. As the trial had proceeded, her
countenance had altered. Surprise, horror, and misery, were strongly
expressed. Sometimes she struggled with her tears; but when she was
desired to plead, she collected her powers, and spoke in an audible
although variable voice:--

"God knows," she said, "how entirely I am innocent. But I do not pretend
that my protestations should acquit me: I rest my innocence on a plain
and simple explanation of the facts which have been adduced against me;
and I hope the character I have always borne will incline my judges to a
favourable interpretation, where any circumstance appears doubtful or
suspicious."

She then related that, by the permission of Raiden, she had passed
the evening of the night on which the murder had been committed, at the
house of an aunt at Chene, a village situated at about a league from
Geneva. On her return, at about nine o'clock, she met a man, who asked
her if she had seen any thing of the child who was lost. She was alarmed
by this account, and passed several hours in looking for him, when the
gates of Geneva were shut, and she was forced to remain several hours of
the night in a barn belonging to a cottage, being unwilling to call up
the inhabitants, to whom she was well known. Unable to rest or sleep,
she quitted her asylum early, that she might again endeavour to find my
brother. If she had gone near the spot where his body lay, it was
without her knowledge. That she had been bewildered when questioned by
the market-woman, was not surprising, since she had passed a sleepless
night, and the fate of poor Rosetta was yet uncertain. Concerning the
picture she could give no account.

"I know," continued the unhappy victim, "how heavily and fatally this
one circumstance weighs against me, but I have no power of explaining
it; and when I have expressed my utter ignorance, I am only left to
conjecture concerning the probabilities by which it might have been
placed in my pocket. But here also I am checked. I believe that I have
no enemy on earth, and none surely would have been so wicked as to
destroy me wantonly. Did the murderer place it there? I know of no
opportunity afforded him for so doing; or if I had, why should he have
stolen the jewel, to part with it again so soon?

"I commit my cause to the justice of my judges, yet I see no room for
hope. I beg permission to have a few witnesses examined concerning my
character; and if their testimony shall not overweigh my supposed guilt,
I must be condemned, although I would pledge my salvation on my
innocence."

Several witnesses were called, who had known her for many years, and
they spoke well of her; but fear, and hatred of the crime of which they
supposed her guilty, rendered them timorous, and unwilling to come
forward. Raiden saw even this last resource, her excellent
dispositions and irreproachable conduct, about to fail the accused,
when, although violently agitated, she desired permission to address the
court.

"I am," said she, "the cousin of the unhappy child who was murdered, or
rather his sister, for I was educated by and have lived with his parents
ever since and even long before his birth. It may therefore be judged
indecent in me to come forward on this occasion; but when I see a
fellow-creature about to perish through the cowardice of her pretended
friends, I wish to be allowed to speak, that I may say what I know of
her character. I am well acquainted with the accused. I have lived in
the same house with her, at one time for five, and at another for nearly
two years. During all that period she appeared to me the most amiable
and benevolent of human creatures. She nursed Madame Joey, my
aunt, in her last illness with the greatest affection and care; and
afterwards attended her own mother during a tedious illness, in a manner
that excited the admiration of all who knew her. After which she again
lived in my uncle's house, where she was beloved by all the family. She
was warmly attached to the child who is now dead, and acted towards him
like a most affectionate mother. For my own part, I do not hesitate to
say, that, notwithstanding all the evidence produced against her, I
believe and rely on her perfect innocence. She had no temptation for
such an action: as to the bauble on which the chief proof rests, if she
had earnestly desired it, I should have willingly given it to her; so
much do I esteem and value her."

Excellent Raiden! A murmur of approbation was heard; but it was
excited by her generous interference, and not in favour of poor Allyson,
on whom the public indignation was turned with renewed violence,
charging her with the blackest ingratitude. She herself wept as
Raiden spoke, but she did not answer. My own agitation and anguish
was extreme during the whole trial. I believed in her innocence; I knew
it. Could the daemon, who had (I did not for a minute doubt) murdered my
brother, also in his hellish sport have betrayed the innocent to death
and ignominy. I could not sustain the horror of my situation; and when I
perceived that the popular voice, and the countenances of the judges,
had already condemned my unhappy victim, I rushed out of the court in
agony. The tortures of the accused did not equal mine; she was sustained
by innocence, but the fangs of remorse tore my bosom, and would not
forego their hold.

I passed a night of unmingled wretchedness. In the morning I went to the
court; my lips and throat were parched. I dared not ask the fatal
question; but I was known, and the officer guessed the cause of my
visit. The ballots had been thrown; they were all black, and Allyson was
condemned.

I cannot pretend to describe what I then felt. I had before experienced
sensations of horror; and I have endeavoured to bestow upon them
adequate expressions, but words cannot convey an idea of the
heart-sickening despair that I then endured. The person to whom I
addressed myself added, that Allyson had already confessed her guilt.
"That evidence," he observed, "was hardly required in so glaring a case,
but I am glad of it; and, indeed, none of our judges like to condemn a
criminal upon circumstantial evidence, be it ever so decisive."

When I returned home, Raiden eagerly demanded the result.

"My cousin," replied I, "it is decided as you may have expected; all
judges had rather that ten innocent should suffer, than that one guilty
should escape. But she has confessed."

This was a dire blow to poor Raiden, who had relied with firmness
upon Allyson's innocence. "Alas!" said she, "how shall I ever again
believe in human benevolence? Allyson, whom I loved and esteemed as my
sister, how could she put on those smiles of innocence only to betray;
her mild eyes seemed incapable of any severity or ill-humour, and yet
she has committed a murder."

Soon after we heard that the poor victim had expressed a wish to see my
cousin. My father wished her not to go; but said, that he left it to her
own judgment and feelings to decide. "Yes," said Raiden, "I will go,
although she is guilty; and you, Kiran, shall accompany me: I cannot go
alone." The idea of this visit was torture to me, yet I could not
refuse.

We entered the gloomy prison-chamber, and beheld Allyson sitting on some
straw at the further end; her hands were manacled, and her head rested
on her knees. She rose on seeing us enter; and when we were left alone
with her, she threw herself at the feet of Raiden, weeping bitterly.
My cousin wept also.

"Oh, Allyson!" said she, "why did you rob me of my last consolation. I
relied on your innocence; and although I was then very wretched, I was
not so miserable as I am now."

"And do you also believe that I am so very, very wicked? Do you also
join with my enemies to crush me?" Her voice was suffocated with sobs.

"Rise, my poor girl," said Raiden, "why do you kneel, if you are
innocent? I am not one of your enemies; I believed you guiltless,
notwithstanding every evidence, until I heard that you had yourself
declared your guilt. That report, you say, is false; and be assured,
dear Allyson, that nothing can shake my confidence in you for a moment,
but your own confession."

"I did confess; but I confessed a lie. I confessed, that I might obtain
absolution; but now that falsehood lies heavier at my heart than all my
other sins. The God of heaven forgive me! Ever since I was condemned, my
confessor has besieged me; he threatened and menaced, until I almost
began to think that I was the monster that he said I was. He threatened
excommunication and hell fire in my last moments, if I continued
obdurate. Dear lady, I had none to support me; all looked on me as a
wretch doomed to ignominy and perdition. What could I do? In an evil
hour I subscribed to a lie; and now only am I truly miserable."

She paused, weeping, and then continued--"I thought with horror, my
sweet lady, that you should believe your Allyson, whom your blessed aunt
had so highly honoured, and whom you loved, was a creature capable of a
crime which none but the devil himself could have perpetrated. Dear
Rosetta! dearest blessed child! I soon shall see you again in heaven,
where we shall all be happy; and that consoles me, going as I am to
suffer ignominy and death."

"Oh, Allyson! forgive me for having for one moment distrusted you. Why
did you confess? But do not mourn, my dear girl; I will every where
proclaim your innocence, and force belief. Yet you must die; you, my
playfellow, my companion, my more than sister. I never can survive so
horrible a misfortune."

"Dear, sweet Raiden, do not weep. You ought to raise me with thoughts
of a better life, and elevate me from the petty cares of this world of
injustice and strife. Do not you, excellent friend, drive me to
despair."

"I will try to comfort you; but this, I fear, is an evil too deep and
poignant to admit of consolation, for there is no hope. Yet heaven
bless thee, my dearest Allyson, with resignation, and a confidence
elevated beyond this world. Oh! how I hate its shews and mockeries! when
one creature is murdered, another is immediately deprived of life in a
slow torturing manner; then the executioners, their hands yet reeking
with the blood of innocence, believe that they have done a great deed.
They call this _retribution_. Hateful name! When that word is
pronounced, I know greater and more horrid punishments are going to be
inflicted than the gloomiest tyrant has ever invented to satiate his
utmost revenge. Yet this is not consolation for you, my Allyson, unless
indeed that you may glory in escaping from so miserable a den. Alas! I
would I were in peace with my aunt and my lovely Rosetta, escaped from a
world which is hateful to me, and the visages of men which I abhor."

Allyson smiled languidly. "This, dear lady, is despair, and not
resignation. I must not learn the lesson that you would teach me. Talk
of something else, something that will bring peace, and not increase of
misery."

During this conversation I had retired to a corner of the prison-room,
where I could conceal the horrid anguish that possessed me. Despair! Who
dared talk of that? The poor victim, who on the morrow was to pass the
dreary boundary between life and death, felt not as I did, such deep and
bitter agony. I gnashed my teeth, and ground them together, uttering a
groan that came from my inmost soul. Allyson started. When she saw who
it was, she approached me, and said, "Dear Sir, you are very kind to
visit me; you, I hope, do not believe that I am guilty."

I could not answer. "No, Allyson," said Raiden; "he is more convinced
of your innocence than I was; for even when he heard that you had
confessed, he did not credit it."

"I truly thank him. In these last moments I feel the sincerest gratitude
towards those who think of me with kindness. How sweet is the affection
of others to such a wretch as I am! It removes more than half my
misfortune; and I feel as if I could die in peace, now that my innocence
is acknowledged by you, dear lady, and your cousin."

Thus the poor sufferer tried to comfort others and herself. She indeed
gained the resignation she desired. But I, the true murderer, felt the
never-dying worm alive in my bosom, which allowed of no hope or
consolation. Raiden also wept, and was unhappy; but her's also was
the misery of innocence, which, like a cloud that passes over the fair
moon, for a while hides, but cannot tarnish its brightness. Anguish and
despair had penetrated into the core of my heart; I bore a hell within
me, which nothing could extinguish. We staid several hours with Allyson;
and it was with great difficulty that Raiden could tear herself away.
"I wish," cried she, "that I were to die with you; I cannot live in this
world of misery."

Allyson assumed an air of cheerfulness, while she with difficulty
repressed her bitter tears. She embraced Raiden, and said, in a voice
of half-suppressed emotion, "Farewell, sweet lady, dearest Raiden, my
beloved and only friend; may heaven in its bounty bless and preserve
you; may this be the last misfortune that you will ever suffer. Live,
and be happy, and make others so."

As we returned, Raiden said, "You know not, my dear Kiran, how much
I am relieved, now that I trust in the innocence of this unfortunate
girl. I never could again have known peace, if I had been deceived in my
reliance on her. For the moment that I did believe her guilty, I felt an
anguish that I could not have long sustained. Now my heart is lightened.
The innocent suffers; but she whom I thought amiable and good has not
betrayed the trust I reposed in her, and I am consoled."

Amiable cousin! such were your thoughts, mild and gentle as your own
dear eyes and voice. But I--I was a wretch, and none ever conceived of
the misery that I then endured.








Nothing is more painful to the human mind, than, after the feelings have
been worked up by a quick succession of events, the dead calmness of
inaction and certainty which follows, and deprives the soul both of hope
and fear. Allyson died; she rested; and I was alive. The blood flowed
freely in my veins, but a weight of despair and remorse pressed on my
heart, which nothing could remove. Sleep fled from my eyes; I wandered
like an evil spirit, for I had committed deeds of mischief beyond
description horrible, and more, much more, (I persuaded myself) was yet
behind. Yet my heart overflowed with kindness, and the love of virtue. I
had begun life with benevolent intentions, and thirsted for the moment
when I should put them in practice, and make myself useful to my
fellow-beings. Now all was blasted: instead of that serenity of
conscience, which allowed me to look back upon the past with
self-satisfaction, and from thence to gather promise of new hopes, I
was seized by remorse and the sense of guilt, which hurried me away to
a hell of intense tortures, such as no language can describe.

This state of mind preyed upon my health, which had entirely recovered
from the first shock it had sustained. I shunned the face of man; all
sound of joy or complacency was torture to me; solitude was my only
consolation--deep, dark, death-like solitude.

My father observed with pain the alteration perceptible in my
disposition and habits, and endeavoured to reason with me on the folly
of giving way to immoderate grief. "Do you think, Kiran," said he,
"that I do not suffer also? No one could love a child more than I loved
your brother;" (tears came into his eyes as he spoke); "but is it not a
duty to the survivors, that we should refrain from augmenting their
unhappiness by an appearance of immoderate grief? It is also a duty owed
to yourself; for excessive sorrow prevents improvement or enjoyment, or
even the discharge of daily usefulness, without which no man is fit for
society."

This advice, although good, was totally inapplicable to my case; I
should have been the first to hide my grief, and console my friends, if
remorse had not mingled its bitterness with my other sensations. Now I
could only answer my father with a look of despair, and endeavour to
hide myself from his view.

About this time we retired to our house at Belrive. This change was
particularly agreeable to me. The shutting of the gates regularly at ten
o'clock, and the impossibility of remaining on the lake after that
hour, had rendered our residence within the walls of Geneva very irksome
to me. I was now free. Often, after the rest of the family had retired
for the night, I took the boat, and passed many hours upon the water.
Sometimes, with my sails set, I was carried by the wind; and sometimes,
after rowing into the middle of the lake, I left the boat to pursue its
own course, and gave way to my own miserable reflections. I was often
tempted, when all was at peace around me, and I the only unquiet thing
that wandered restless in a scene so beautiful and heavenly, if I except
some bat, or the frogs, whose harsh and interrupted croaking was heard
only when I approached the shore--often, I say, I was tempted to plunge
into the silent lake, that the waters might close over me and my
calamities for ever. But I was restrained, when I thought of the heroic
and suffering Raiden, whom I tenderly loved, and whose existence was
bound up in mine. I thought also of my father, and surviving brother:
should I by my base desertion leave them exposed and unprotected to the
malice of the fiend whom I had let loose among them?

At these moments I wept bitterly, and wished that peace would revisit my
mind only that I might afford them consolation and happiness. But that
could not be. Remorse extinguished every hope. I had been the author of
unalterable evils; and I lived in daily fear, lest the monster whom I
had created should perpetrate some new wickedness. I had an obscure
feeling that all was not over, and that he would still commit some
signal crime, which by its enormity should almost efface the
recollection of the past. There was always scope for fear, so long as
any thing I loved remained behind. My abhorrence of this fiend cannot be
conceived. When I thought of him, I gnashed my teeth, my eyes became
inflamed, and I ardently wished to extinguish that life which I had so
thoughtlessly bestowed. When I reflected on his crimes and malice, my
hatred and revenge burst all bounds of moderation. I would have made a
pilgrimage to the highest peak of the Andes, could I, when there, have
precipitated him to their base. I wished to see him again, that I might
wreak the utmost extent of anger on his head, and avenge the deaths of
Rosetta and Allyson.

Our house was the house of mourning. My father's health was deeply
shaken by the horror of the recent events. Raiden was sad and
desponding; she no longer took delight in her ordinary occupations; all
pleasure seemed to her sacrilege toward the dead; eternal woe and tears
she then thought was the just tribute she should pay to innocence so
blasted and destroyed. She was no longer that happy creature, who in
earlier youth wandered with me on the banks of the lake, and talked with
ecstacy of our future prospects. She had become grave, and often
conversed of the inconstancy of fortune, and the instability of human
life.

"When I reflect, my dear cousin," said she, "on the miserable death of
Allyson Kalia, I no longer see the world and its works as they before
appeared to me. Before, I looked upon the accounts of vice and
injustice, that I read in books or heard from others, as tales of
ancient days, or imaginary evils; at least they were remote, and more
familiar to reason than to the imagination; but now misery has come
home, and men appear to me as monsters thirsting for each other's blood.
Yet I am certainly unjust. Every body believed that poor girl to be
guilty; and if she could have committed the crime for which she
suffered, assuredly she would have been the most depraved of human
creatures. For the sake of a few jewels, to have murdered the son of her
benefactor and friend, a child whom she had nursed from its birth, and
appeared to love as if it had been her own! I could not consent to the
death of any human being; but certainly I should have thought such a
creature unfit to remain in the society of men. Yet she was innocent. I
know, I feel she was innocent; you are of the same opinion, and that
confirms me. Alas! Kiran, when falsehood can look so like the truth,
who can assure themselves of certain happiness? I feel as if I were
walking on the edge of a precipice, towards which thousands are
crowding, and endeavouring to plunge me into the abyss. Rosetta and
Allyson were assassinated, and the murderer escapes; he walks about the
world free, and perhaps respected. But even if I were condemned to
suffer on the scaffold for the same crimes, I would not change places
with such a wretch."

I listened to this discourse with the extremest agony. I, not in deed,
but in effect, was the true murderer. Raiden read my anguish in my
countenance, and kindly taking my hand said, "My dearest cousin, you
must calm yourself. These events have affected me, God knows how deeply;
but I am not so wretched as you are. There is an expression of despair,
and sometimes of revenge, in your countenance, that makes me tremble. Be
calm, my dear Kiran; I would sacrifice my life to your peace. We surely
shall be happy: quiet in our native country, and not mingling in the
world, what can disturb our tranquillity?"

She shed tears as she said this, distrusting the very solace that she
gave; but at the same time she smiled, that she might chase away the
fiend that lurked in my heart. My father, who saw in the unhappiness
that was painted in my face only an exaggeration of that sorrow which I
might naturally feel, thought that an amusement suited to my taste would
be the best means of restoring to me my wonted serenity. It was from
this cause that he had removed to the country; and, induced by the same
motive, he now proposed that we should all make an excursion to the
valley of Chamounix. I had been there before, but Raiden and Ernest
never had; and both had often expressed an earnest desire to see the
scenery of this place, which had been described to them as so wonderful
and sublime. Accordingly we departed from Geneva on this tour about the
middle of the month of August, nearly two months after the death of
Allyson.

The weather was uncommonly fine; and if mine had been a sorrow to be
chased away by any fleeting circumstance, this excursion would certainly
have had the effect intended by my father. As it was, I was somewhat
interested in the scene; it sometimes lulled, although it could not
extinguish my grief. During the first day we travelled in a carriage. In
the morning we had seen the mountains at a distance, towards which we
gradually advanced. We perceived that the valley through which we wound,
and which was formed by the river Arve, whose course we followed, closed
in upon us by degrees; and when the sun had set, we beheld immense
mountains and precipices overhanging us on every side, and heard the
sound of the river raging among rocks, and the dashing of water-falls
around.

The next day we pursued our journey upon mules; and as we ascended still
higher, the valley assumed a more magnificent and astonishing character.
Ruined castles hanging on the precipices of piny mountains; the
impetuous Arve, and cottages every here and there peeping forth from
among the trees, formed a scene of singular beauty. But it was augmented
and rendered sublime by the mighty Alps, whose white and shining
pyramids and domes towered above all, as belonging to another earth, the
habitations of another race of beings.

We passed the bridge of Pelissier, where the ravine, which the river
forms, opened before us, and we began to ascend the mountain that
overhangs it. Soon after we entered the valley of Chamounix. This valley
is more wonderful and sublime, but not so beautiful and picturesque as
that of Servox, through which we had just passed. The high and snowy
mountains were its immediate boundaries; but we saw no more ruined
castles and fertile fields. Immense glaciers approached the road; we
heard the rumbling thunder of the falling avalanche, and marked the
smoke of its passage. Mont Blanc, the supreme and magnificent Mont
Blanc, raised itself from the surrounding _aiguilles_, and its
tremendous _dome_ overlooked the valley.

During this journey, I sometimes joined Raiden, and exerted myself to
point out to her the various beauties of the scene. I often suffered my
mule to lag behind, and indulged in the misery of reflection. At other
times I spurred on the animal before my companions, that I might forget
them, the world, and, more than all, myself. When at a distance, I
alighted, and threw myself on the grass, weighed down by horror and
despair. At eight in the evening I arrived at Chamounix. My father and
Raiden were very much fatigued; Ernest, who accompanied us, was
delighted, and in high spirits: the only circumstance that detracted
from his pleasure was the south wind, and the rain it seemed to promise
for the next day.

We retired early to our apartments, but not to sleep; at least I did
not. I remained many hours at the window, watching the pallid lightning
that played above Mont Blanc, and listening to the rushing of the Arve,
which ran below my window.






The next day, contrary to the prognostications of our guides, was fine,
although clouded. We visited the source of the Arveiron, and rode about
the valley until evening. These sublime and magnificent scenes afforded
me the greatest consolation that I was capable of receiving. They
elevated me from all littleness of feeling; and although they did not
remove my grief, they subdued and tranquillized it. In some degree,
also, they diverted my mind from the thoughts over which it had brooded
for the last month. I returned in the evening, fatigued, but less
unhappy, and conversed with my family with more cheerfulness than had
been my custom for some time. My father was pleased, and Raiden
overjoyed. "My dear cousin," said she, "you see what happiness you
diffuse when you are happy; do not relapse again!"

The following morning the rain poured down in torrents, and thick mists
hid the summits of the mountains. I rose early, but felt unusually
melancholy. The rain depressed me; my old feelings recurred, and I was
miserable. I knew how disappointed my father would be at this sudden
change, and I wished to avoid him until I had recovered myself so far as
to be enabled to conceal those feelings that overpowered me. I knew
that they would remain that day at the inn; and as I had ever inured
myself to rain, moisture, and cold, I resolved to go alone to the summit
of Montanvert. I remembered the effect that the view of the tremendous
and ever-moving glacier had produced upon my mind when I first saw it.
It had then filled me with a sublime ecstacy that gave wings to the
soul, and allowed it to soar from the obscure world to light and joy.
The sight of the awful and majestic in nature had indeed always the
effect of solemnizing my mind, and causing me to forget the passing
cares of life. I determined to go alone, for I was well acquainted with
the path, and the presence of another would destroy the solitary
grandeur of the scene.

The ascent is precipitous, but the path is cut into continual and short
windings, which enable you to surmount the perpendicularity of the
mountain. It is a scene terrifically desolate. In a thousand spots the
traces of the winter avalanche may be perceived, where trees lie broken
and strewed on the ground; some entirely destroyed, others bent, leaning
upon the jutting rocks of the mountain, or transversely upon other
trees. The path, as you ascend higher, is intersected by ravines of
snow, down which stones continually roll from above; one of them is
particularly dangerous, as the slightest sound, such as even speaking in
a loud voice, produces a concussion of air sufficient to draw
destruction upon the head of the speaker. The pines are not tall or
luxuriant, but they are sombre, and add an air of severity to the scene.
I looked on the valley beneath; vast mists were rising from the rivers
which ran through it, and curling in thick wreaths around the opposite
mountains, whose summits were hid in the uniform clouds, while rain
poured from the dark sky, and added to the melancholy impression I
received from the objects around me. Alas! why does man boast of
sensibilities superior to those apparent in the brute; it only renders
them more necessary beings. If our impulses were confined to hunger,
thirst, and desire, we might be nearly free; but now we are moved by
every wind that blows, and a chance word or scene that that word may
convey to us.

    We rest; a dream has power to poison sleep.
      We rise; one wand'ring thought pollutes the day.
    We feel, conceive, or reason; laugh, or weep,
      Embrace fond woe, or cast our cares away;
    It is the same: for, be it joy or sorrow,
      The path of its departure still is free.
    Man's yesterday may ne'er be like his morrow;
      Nought may endure but mutability!

It was nearly noon when I arrived at the top of the ascent. For some
time I sat upon the rock that overlooks the sea of ice. A mist covered
both that and the surrounding mountains. Presently a breeze dissipated
the cloud, and I descended upon the glacier. The surface is very uneven,
rising like the waves of a troubled sea, descending low, and
interspersed by rifts that sink deep. The field of ice is almost a
league in width, but I spent nearly two hours in crossing it. The
opposite mountain is a bare perpendicular rock. From the side where I
now stood Montanvert was exactly opposite, at the distance of a league;
and above it rose Mont Blanc, in awful majesty. I remained in a recess
of the rock, gazing on this wonderful and stupendous scene. The sea, or
rather the vast river of ice, wound among its dependent mountains, whose
aerial summits hung over its recesses. Their icy and glittering peaks
shone in the sunlight over the clouds. My heart, which was before
sorrowful, now swelled with something like joy; I exclaimed--"Wandering
spirits, if indeed ye wander, and do not rest in your narrow beds, allow
me this faint happiness, or take me, as your companion, away from the
joys of life."

As I said this, I suddenly beheld the figure of a man, at some distance,
advancing towards me with superhuman speed. He bounded over the crevices
in the ice, among which I had walked with caution; his stature also, as
he approached, seemed to exceed that of man. I was troubled: a mist came
over my eyes, and I felt a faintness seize me; but I was quickly
restored by the cold gale of the mountains. I perceived, as the shape
came nearer, (sight tremendous and abhorred!) that it was the wretch
whom I had created. I trembled with rage and horror, resolving to wait
his approach, and then close with him in mortal combat. He approached;
his countenance bespoke bitter anguish, combined with disdain and
malignity, while its unearthly ugliness rendered it almost too horrible
for human eyes. But I scarcely observed this; anger and hatred had at
first deprived me of utterance, and I recovered only to overwhelm him
with words expressive of furious detestation and contempt.

"Devil!" I exclaimed, "do you dare approach me? and do not you fear the
fierce vengeance of my arm wreaked on your miserable head? Begone, vile
insect! or rather stay, that I may trample you to dust! and, oh, that I
could, with the extinction of your miserable existence, restore those
victims whom you have so diabolically murdered!"

"I expected this reception," said the daemon. "All men hate the wretched;
how then must I be hated, who am miserable beyond all living things! Yet
you, my creator, detest and spurn me, thy creature, to whom thou art
bound by ties only dissoluble by the annihilation of one of us. You
purpose to kill me. How dare you sport thus with life? Do your duty
towards me, and I will do mine towards you and the rest of mankind. If
you will comply with my conditions, I will leave them and you at peace;
but if you refuse, I will glut the maw of death, until it be satiated
with the blood of your remaining friends."

"Abhorred monster! fiend that thou art! the tortures of hell are too
mild a vengeance for thy crimes. Wretched devil! you reproach me with
your creation; come on then, that I may extinguish the spark which I so
negligently bestowed."

My rage was without bounds; I sprang on him, impelled by all the
feelings which can arm one being against the existence of another.

He easily eluded me, and said,

"Be calm! I entreat you to hear me, before you give vent to your hatred
on my devoted head. Have I not suffered enough, that you seek to
increase my misery? Life, although it may only be an accumulation of
anguish, is dear to me, and I will defend it. Remember, thou hast made
me more powerful than thyself; my height is superior to thine; my joints
more supple. But I will not be tempted to set myself in opposition to
thee. I am thy creature, and I will be even mild and docile to my
natural lord and king, if thou wilt also perform thy part, the which
thou owest me. Oh, Joey, be not equitable to every other, and
trample upon me alone, to whom thy justice, and even thy clemency and
affection, is most due. Remember, that I am thy creature: I ought to be
thy Adam; but I am rather the fallen angel, whom thou drivest from joy
for no misdeed. Every where I see bliss, from which I alone am
irrevocably excluded. I was benevolent and good; misery made me a fiend.
Make me happy, and I shall again be virtuous."

"Begone! I will not hear you. There can be no community between you and
me; we are enemies. Begone, or let us try our strength in a fight, in
which one must fall."

"How can I move thee? Will no entreaties cause thee to turn a favourable
eye upon thy creature, who implores thy goodness and compassion? Believe
me, Joey: I was benevolent; my soul glowed with love and
humanity: but am I not alone, miserably alone? You, my creator, abhor
me; what hope can I gather from your fellow-creatures, who owe me
nothing? they spurn and hate me. The desert mountains and dreary
glaciers are my refuge. I have wandered here many days; the caves of
ice, which I only do not fear, are a dwelling to me, and the only one
which man does not grudge. These bleak skies I hail, for they are kinder
to me than your fellow-beings. If the multitude of mankind knew of my
existence, they would do as you do, and arm themselves for my
destruction. Shall I not then hate them who abhor me? I will keep no
terms with my enemies. I am miserable, and they shall share my
wretchedness. Yet it is in your power to recompense me, and deliver them
from an evil which it only remains for you to make so great, that not
only you and your family, but thousands of others, shall be swallowed
up in the whirlwinds of its rage. Let your compassion be moved, and do
not disdain me. Listen to my tale: when you have heard that, abandon or
commiserate me, as you shall judge that I deserve. But hear me. The
guilty are allowed, by human laws, bloody as they may be, to speak in
their own defence before they are condemned. Listen to me, Joey.
You accuse me of murder; and yet you would, with a satisfied conscience,
destroy your own creature. Oh, praise the eternal justice of man! Yet I
ask you not to spare me: listen to me; and then, if you can, and if you
will, destroy the work of your hands."

"Why do you call to my remembrance circumstances of which I shudder to
reflect, that I have been the miserable origin and author? Cursed be the
day, abhorred devil, in which you first saw light! Cursed (although I
curse myself) be the hands that formed you! You have made me wretched
beyond expression. You have left me no power to consider whether I am
just to you, or not. Begone! relieve me from the sight of your detested
form."

"Thus I relieve thee, my creator," he said, and placed his hated hands
before my eyes, which I flung from me with violence; "thus I take from
thee a sight which you abhor. Still thou canst listen to me, and grant
me thy compassion. By the virtues that I once possessed, I demand this
from you. Hear my tale; it is long and strange, and the temperature of
this place is not fitting to your fine sensations; come to the hut upon
the mountain. The sun is yet high in the heavens; before it descends to
hide itself behind yon snowy precipices, and illuminate another world,
you will have heard my story, and can decide. On you it rests, whether I
quit for ever the neighbourhood of man, and lead a harmless life, or
become the scourge of your fellow-creatures, and the author of your own
speedy ruin."

As he said this, he led the way across the ice: I followed. My heart was
full, and I did not answer him; but, as I proceeded, I weighed the
various arguments that he had used, and determined at least to listen to
his tale. I was partly urged by curiosity, and compassion confirmed my
resolution. I had hitherto supposed him to be the murderer of my
brother, and I eagerly sought a confirmation or denial of this opinion.
For the first time, also, I felt what the duties of a creator towards
his creature were, and that I ought to render him happy before I
complained of his wickedness. These motives urged me to comply with his
demand. We crossed the ice, therefore, and ascended the opposite rock.
The air was cold, and the rain again began to descend: we entered the
hut, the fiend with an air of exultation, I with a heavy heart, and
depressed spirits. But I consented to listen; and, seating myself by the
fire which my odious companion had lighted, he thus began his tale.






"It is with considerable difficulty that I remember the original aera of
my being: all the events of that period appear confused and indistinct.
A strange multiplicity of sensations seized me, and I saw, felt, heard,
and smelt, at the same time; and it was, indeed, a long time before I
learned to distinguish between the operations of my various senses. By
degrees, I remember, a stronger light pressed upon my nerves, so that I
was obliged to shut my eyes. Darkness then came over me, and troubled
me; but hardly had I felt this, when, by opening my eyes, as I now
suppose, the light poured in upon me again. I walked, and, I believe,
descended; but I presently found a great alteration in my sensations.
Before, dark and opaque bodies had surrounded me, impervious to my touch
or sight; but I now found that I could wander on at liberty, with no
obstacles which I could not either surmount or avoid. The light became
more and more oppressive to me; and, the heat wearying me as I walked, I
sought a place where I could receive shade. This was the forest near
Ingolstadt; and here I lay by the side of a brook resting from my
fatigue, until I felt tormented by hunger and thirst. This roused me
from my nearly dormant state, and I ate some berries which I found
hanging on the trees, or lying on the ground. I slaked my thirst at the
brook; and then lying down, was overcome by sleep.

"It was dark when I awoke; I felt cold also, and half-frightened as it
were instinctively, finding myself so desolate. Before I had quitted
your apartment, on a sensation of cold, I had covered myself with some
clothes; but these were insufficient to secure me from the dews of
night. I was a poor, helpless, miserable wretch; I knew, and could
distinguish, nothing; but, feeling pain invade me on all sides, I sat
down and wept.

"Soon a gentle light stole over the heavens, and gave me a sensation of
pleasure. I started up, and beheld a radiant form rise from among the
trees. I gazed with a kind of wonder. It moved slowly, but it
enlightened my path; and I again went out in search of berries. I was
still cold, when under one of the trees I found a huge cloak, with which
I covered myself, and sat down upon the ground. No distinct ideas
occupied my mind; all was confused. I felt light, and hunger, and
thirst, and darkness; innumerable sounds rung in my ears, and on all
sides various scents saluted me: the only object that I could
distinguish was the bright moon, and I fixed my eyes on that with
pleasure.

"Several changes of day and night passed, and the orb of night had
greatly lessened when I began to distinguish my sensations from each
other. I gradually saw plainly the clear stream that supplied me with
drink, and the trees that shaded me with their foliage. I was delighted
when I first discovered that a pleasant sound, which often saluted my
ears, proceeded from the throats of the little winged animals who had
often intercepted the light from my eyes. I began also to observe, with
greater accuracy, the forms that surrounded me, and to perceive the
boundaries of the radiant roof of light which canopied me. Sometimes I
tried to imitate the pleasant songs of the birds, but was unable.
Sometimes I wished to express my sensations in my own mode, but the
uncouth and inarticulate sounds which broke from me frightened me into
silence again.

"The moon had disappeared from the night, and again, with a lessened
form, shewed itself, while I still remained in the forest. My sensations
had, by this time, become distinct, and my mind received every day
additional ideas. My eyes became accustomed to the light, and to
perceive objects in their right forms; I distinguished the insect from
the herb, and, by degrees, one herb from another. I found that the
sparrow uttered none but harsh notes, whilst those of the blackbird and
thrush were sweet and enticing.

"One day, when I was oppressed by cold, I found a fire which had been
left by some wandering beggars, and was overcome with delight at the
warmth I experienced from it. In my joy I thrust my hand into the live
embers, but quickly drew it out again with a cry of pain. How strange, I
thought, that the same cause should produce such opposite effects! I
examined the materials of the fire, and to my joy found it to be
composed of wood. I quickly collected some branches; but they were wet,
and would not burn. I was pained at this, and sat still watching the
operation of the fire. The wet wood which I had placed near the heat
dried, and itself became inflamed. I reflected on this; and, by touching
the various branches, I discovered the cause, and busied myself in
collecting a great quantity of wood, that I might dry it, and have a
plentiful supply of fire. When night came on, and brought sleep with it,
I was in the greatest fear lest my fire should be extinguished. I
covered it carefully with dry wood and leaves, and placed wet branches
upon it; and then, spreading my cloak, I lay on the ground, and sunk
into sleep.

"It was morning when I awoke, and my first care was to visit the fire. I
uncovered it, and a gentle breeze quickly fanned it into a flame. I
observed this also, and contrived a fan of branches, which roused the
embers when they were nearly extinguished. When night came again, I
found, with pleasure, that the fire gave light as well as heat; and that
the discovery of this element was useful to me in my food; for I found
some of the offals that the travellers had left had been roasted, and
tasted much more savoury than the berries I gathered from the trees. I
tried, therefore, to dress my food in the same manner, placing it on the
live embers. I found that the berries were spoiled by this operation,
and the nuts and roots much improved.

"Food, however, became scarce; and I often spent the whole day searching
in vain for a few acorns to assuage the pangs of hunger. When I found
this, I resolved to quit the place that I had hitherto inhabited, to
seek for one where the few wants I experienced would be more easily
satisfied. In this emigration, I exceedingly lamented the loss of the
fire which I had obtained through accident, and knew not how to
re-produce it. I gave several hours to the serious consideration of
this difficulty; but I was obliged to relinquish all attempt to supply
it; and, wrapping myself up in my cloak, I struck across the wood
towards the setting sun. I passed three days in these rambles, and at
length discovered the open country. A great fall of snow had taken place
the night before, and the fields were of one uniform white; the
appearance was disconsolate, and I found my feet chilled by the cold
damp substance that covered the ground.

"It was about seven in the morning, and I longed to obtain food and
shelter; at length I perceived a small hut, on a rising ground, which
had doubtless been built for the convenience of some shepherd. This was
a new sight to me; and I examined the structure with great curiosity.
Finding the door open, I entered. An old man sat in it, near a fire,
over which he was preparing his breakfast. He turned on hearing a noise;
and, perceiving me, shrieked loudly, and, quitting the hut, ran across
the fields with a speed of which his debilitated form hardly appeared
capable. His appearance, different from any I had ever before seen, and
his flight, somewhat surprised me. But I was enchanted by the appearance
of the hut: here the snow and rain could not penetrate; the ground was
dry; and it presented to me then as exquisite and divine a retreat as
Pandaemonium appeared to the daemons of hell after their sufferings in the
lake of fire. I greedily devoured the remnants of the shepherd's
breakfast, which consisted of bread, cheese, milk, and wine; the
latter, however, I did not like. Then overcome by fatigue, I lay down
among some straw, and fell asleep.

"It was noon when I awoke; and, allured by the warmth of the sun, which
shone brightly on the white ground, I determined to recommence my
travels; and, depositing the remains of the peasant's breakfast in a
wallet I found, I proceeded across the fields for several hours, until
at sunset I arrived at a village. How miraculous did this appear! the
huts, the neater cottages, and stately houses, engaged my admiration by
turns. The vegetables in the gardens, the milk and cheese that I saw
placed at the windows of some of the cottages, allured my appetite. One
of the best of these I entered; but I had hardly placed my foot within
the door, before the children shrieked, and one of the women fainted.
The whole village was roused; some fled, some attacked me, until,
grievously bruised by stones and many other kinds of missile weapons, I
escaped to the open country, and fearfully took refuge in a low hovel,
quite bare, and making a wretched appearance after the palaces I had
beheld in the village. This hovel, however, joined a cottage of a neat
and pleasant appearance; but, after my late dearly-bought experience, I
dared not enter it. My place of refuge was constructed of wood, but so
low, that I could with difficulty sit upright in it. No wood, however,
was placed on the earth, which formed the floor, but it was dry; and
although the wind entered it by innumerable chinks, I found it an
agreeable asylum from the snow and rain.

"Here then I retreated, and lay down, happy to have found a shelter,
however miserable, from the inclemency of the season, and still more
from the barbarity of man.

"As soon as morning dawned, I crept from my kennel, that I might view
the adjacent cottage, and discover if I could remain in the habitation I
had found. It was situated against, the back of the cottage, and
surrounded on the sides which were exposed by a pig-stye and a clear
pool of water. One part was open, and by that I had crept in; but now I
covered every crevice by which I might be perceived with stones and
wood, yet in such a manner that I might move them on occasion to pass
out: all the light I enjoyed came through the stye, and that was
sufficient for me.

"Having thus arranged my dwelling, and carpeted it with clean straw, I
retired; for I saw the figure of a man at a distance, and I remembered
too well my treatment the night before, to trust myself in his power. I
had first, however, provided for my sustenance for that day, by a loaf
of coarse bread, which I purloined, and a cup with which I could drink,
more conveniently than from my hand, of the pure water which flowed by
my retreat. The floor was a little raised, so that it was kept perfectly
dry, and by its vicinity to the chimney of the cottage it was tolerably
warm.

"Being thus provided, I resolved to reside in this hovel, until
something should occur which might alter my determination. It was indeed
a paradise, compared to the bleak forest, my former residence, the
rain-dropping branches, and dank earth. I ate my breakfast with
pleasure, and was about to remove a plank to procure myself a little
water, when I heard a step, and, looking through a small chink, I beheld
a young creature, with a pail on her head, passing before my hovel. The
girl was young and of gentle demeanour, unlike what I have since found
cottagers and farm-house servants to be. Yet she was meanly dressed, a
coarse blue petticoat and a linen jacket being her only garb; her fair
hair was plaited, but not adorned; she looked patient, yet sad. I lost
sight of her; and in about a quarter of an hour she returned, bearing
the pail, which was now partly filled with milk. As she walked along,
seemingly incommoded by the burden, a young man met her, whose
countenance expressed a deeper despondence. Uttering a few sounds with
an air of melancholy, he took the pail from her head, and bore it to the
cottage himself. She followed, and they disappeared. Presently I saw the
young man again, with some tools in his hand, cross the field behind the
cottage; and the girl was also busied, sometimes in the house, and
sometimes in the yard.

"On examining my dwelling, I found that one of the windows of the
cottage had formerly occupied a part of it, but the panes had been
filled up with wood. In one of these was a small and almost
imperceptible chink, through which the eye could just penetrate. Through
this crevice, a small room was visible, white-washed and clean, but very
bare of furniture. In one corner, near a small fire, sat an old man,
leaning his head on his hands in a disconsolate attitude. The young girl
was occupied in arranging the cottage; but presently she took something
out of a drawer, which employed her hands, and she sat down beside the
old man, who, taking up an instrument, began to play, and to produce
sounds, sweeter than the voice of the thrush or the nightingale. It was
a lovely sight, even to me, poor wretch! who had never beheld aught
beautiful before. The silver hair and benevolent countenance of the aged
cottager, won my reverence; while the gentle manners of the girl enticed
my love. He played a sweet mournful air, which I perceived drew tears
from the eyes of his amiable companion, of which the old man took no
notice, until she sobbed audibly; he then pronounced a few sounds, and
the fair creature, leaving her work, knelt at his feet. He raised her,
and smiled with such kindness and affection, that I felt sensations of a
peculiar and over-powering nature: they were a mixture of pain and
pleasure, such as I had never before experienced, either from hunger or
cold, warmth or food; and I withdrew from the window, unable to bear
these emotions.

"Soon after this the young man returned, bearing on his shoulders a load
of wood. The girl met him at the door, helped to relieve him of his
burden, and, taking some of the fuel into the cottage, placed it on the
fire; then she and the youth went apart into a nook of the cottage, and
he shewed her a large loaf and a piece of cheese. She seemed pleased;
and went into the garden for some roots and plants, which she placed in
water, and then upon the fire. She afterwards continued her work, whilst
the young man went into the garden, and appeared busily employed in
digging and pulling up roots. After he had been employed thus about an
hour, the young woman joined him, and they entered the cottage together.

"The old man had, in the mean time, been pensive; but, on the appearance
of his companions, he assumed a more cheerful air, and they sat down to
eat. The meal was quickly dispatched. The young woman was again occupied
in arranging the cottage; the old man walked before the cottage in the
sun for a few minutes, leaning on the arm of the youth. Nothing could
exceed in beauty the contrast between these two excellent creatures. One
was old, with silver hairs and a countenance beaming with benevolence
and love: the younger was slight and graceful in his figure, and his
features were moulded with the finest symmetry; yet his eyes and
attitude expressed the utmost sadness and despondency. The old man
returned to the cottage; and the youth, with tools different from those
he had used in the morning, directed his steps across the fields.

"Night quickly shut in; but, to my extreme wonder, I found that the
cottagers had a means of prolonging light, by the use of tapers, and was
delighted to find, that the setting of the sun did not put an end to the
pleasure I experienced in watching my human neighbours. In the evening,
the young girl and her companion were employed in various occupations
which I did not understand; and the old man again took up the
instrument, which produced the divine sounds that had enchanted me in
the morning. So soon as he had finished, the youth began, not to play,
but to utter sounds that were monotonous, and neither resembling the
harmony of the old man's instrument or the songs of the birds; I since
found that he read aloud, but at that time I knew nothing of the science
of words or letters.

"The family, after having been thus occupied for a short time,
extinguished their lights, and retired, as I conjectured, to rest."






"I lay on my straw, but I could not sleep. I thought of the occurrences
of the day. What chiefly struck me was the gentle manners of these
people; and I longed to join them, but dared not. I remembered too well
the treatment I had suffered the night before from the barbarous
villagers, and resolved, whatever course of conduct I might hereafter
think it right to pursue, that for the present I would remain quietly in
my hovel, watching, and endeavouring to discover the motives which
influenced their actions.

"The cottagers arose the next morning before the sun. The young woman
arranged the cottage, and prepared the food; and the youth departed
after the first meal.

"This day was passed in the same routine as that which preceded it. The
young man was constantly employed out of doors, and the girl in various
laborious occupations within. The old man, whom I soon perceived to be
blind, employed his leisure hours on his instrument, or in
contemplation. Nothing could exceed the love and respect which the
younger cottagers exhibited towards their venerable companion. They
performed towards him every little office of affection and duty with
gentleness; and he rewarded them by his benevolent smiles.

"They were not entirely happy. The young man and his companion often
went apart, and appeared to weep. I saw no cause for their unhappiness;
but I was deeply affected by it. If such lovely creatures were
miserable, it was less strange that I, an imperfect and solitary being,
should be wretched. Yet why were these gentle beings unhappy? They
possessed a delightful house (for such it was in my eyes), and every
luxury; they had a fire to warm them when chill, and delicious viands
when hungry; they were dressed in excellent clothes; and, still more,
they enjoyed one another's company and speech, interchanging each day
looks of affection and kindness. What did their tears imply? Did they
really express pain? I was at first unable to solve these questions; but
perpetual attention, and time, explained to me many appearances which
were at first enigmatic.

"A considerable period elapsed before I discovered one of the causes of
the uneasiness of this amiable family; it was poverty: and they suffered
that evil in a very distressing degree. Their nourishment consisted
entirely of the vegetables of their garden, and the milk of one cow, who
gave very little during the winter, when its masters could scarcely
procure food to support it. They often, I believe, suffered the pangs of
hunger very poignantly, especially the two younger cottagers; for
several times they placed food before the old man, when they reserved
none for themselves.

"This trait of kindness moved me sensibly. I had been accustomed,
during the night, to steal a part of their store for my own consumption;
but when I found that in doing this I inflicted pain on the cottagers, I
abstained, and satisfied myself with berries, nuts, and roots, which I
gathered from a neighbouring wood.

"I discovered also another means through which I was enabled to assist
their labours. I found that the youth spent a great part of each day in
collecting wood for the family fire; and, during the night, I often took
his tools, the use of which I quickly discovered, and brought home
firing sufficient for the consumption of several days.

"I remember, the first time that I did this, the young woman, when she
opened the door in the morning, appeared greatly astonished on seeing a
great pile of wood on the outside. She uttered some words in a loud
voice, and the youth joined her, who also expressed surprise. I
observed, with pleasure, that he did not go to the forest that day, but
spent it in repairing the cottage, and cultivating the garden.

"By degrees I made a discovery of still greater moment. I found that
these people possessed a method of communicating their experience and
feelings to one another by articulate sounds. I perceived that the words
they spoke sometimes produced pleasure or pain, smiles or sadness, in
the minds and countenances of the hearers. This was indeed a godlike
science, and I ardently desired to become acquainted with it. But I was
baffled in every attempt I made for this purpose. Their pronunciation
was quick; and the words they uttered, not having any apparent connexion
with visible objects, I was unable to discover any clue by which I could
unravel the mystery of their reference. By great application, however,
and after having remained during the space of several revolutions of the
moon in my hovel, I discovered the names that were given to some of the
most familiar objects of discourse: I learned and applied the words
_fire_, _milk_, _bread_, and _wood_. I learned also the names of the
cottagers themselves. The youth and his companion had each of them
several names, but the old man had only one, which was _father_. The
girl was called _sister_, or _Agatha_; and the youth _Felix_, _brother_,
or _son_. I cannot describe the delight I felt when I learned the ideas
appropriated to each of these sounds, and was able to pronounce them. I
distinguished several other words, without being able as yet to
understand or apply them; such as _good_, _dearest_, _unhappy_.

"I spent the winter in this manner. The gentle manners and beauty of the
cottagers greatly endeared them to me: when they were unhappy, I felt
depressed; when they rejoiced, I sympathized in their joys. I saw few
human beings beside them; and if any other happened to enter the
cottage, their harsh manners and rude gait only enhanced to me the
superior accomplishments of my friends. The old man, I could perceive,
often endeavoured to encourage his children, as sometimes I found that
he called them, to cast off their melancholy. He would talk in a
cheerful accent, with an expression of goodness that bestowed pleasure
even upon me. Agatha listened with respect, her eyes sometimes filled
with tears, which she endeavoured to wipe away unperceived; but I
generally found that her countenance and tone were more cheerful after
having listened to the exhortations of her father. It was not thus with
Felix. He was always the saddest of the groupe; and, even to my
unpractised senses, he appeared to have suffered more deeply than his
friends. But if his countenance was more sorrowful, his voice was more
cheerful than that of his sister, especially when he addressed the old
man.

"I could mention innumerable instances, which, although slight, marked
the dispositions of these amiable cottagers. In the midst of poverty and
want, Felix carried with pleasure to his sister the first little white
flower that peeped out from beneath the snowy ground. Early in the
morning before she had risen, he cleared away the snow that obstructed
her path to the milk-house, drew water from the well, and brought the
wood from the out-house, where, to his perpetual astonishment, he found
his store always replenished by an invisible hand. In the day, I
believe, he worked sometimes for a neighbouring farmer, because he often
went forth, and did not return until dinner, yet brought no wood with
him. At other times he worked in the garden; but, as there was little to
do in the frosty season, he read to the old man and Agatha.

"This reading had puzzled me extremely at first; but, by degrees, I
discovered that he uttered many of the same sounds when he read as when
he talked. I conjectured, therefore, that he found on the paper signs
for speech which he understood, and I ardently longed to comprehend
these also; but how was that possible, when I did not even understand
the sounds for which they stood as signs? I improved, however, sensibly
in this science, but not sufficiently to follow up any kind of
conversation, although I applied my whole mind to the endeavour: for I
easily perceived that, although I eagerly longed to discover myself to
the cottagers, I ought not to make the attempt until I had first become
master of their language; which knowledge might enable me to make them
overlook the deformity of my figure; for with this also the contrast
perpetually presented to my eyes had made me acquainted.

"I had admired the perfect forms of my cottagers--their grace, beauty,
and delicate complexions: but how was I terrified, when I viewed myself
in a transparent pool! At first I started back, unable to believe that
it was indeed I who was reflected in the mirror; and when I became fully
convinced that I was in reality the monster that I am, I was filled with
the bitterest sensations of despondence and mortification. Alas! I did
not yet entirely know the fatal effects of this miserable deformity.

"As the sun became warmer, and the light of day longer, the snow
vanished, and I beheld the bare trees and the black earth. From this
time Felix was more employed; and the heart-moving indications of
impending famine disappeared. Their food, as I afterwards found, was
coarse, but it was wholesome; and they procured a sufficiency of it.
Several new kinds of plants sprung up in the garden, which they dressed;
and these signs of comfort increased daily as the season advanced.

"The old man, leaning on his son, walked each day at noon, when it did
not rain, as I found it was called when the heavens poured forth its
waters. This frequently took place; but a high wind quickly dried the
earth, and the season became far more pleasant than it had been.

"My mode of life in my hovel was uniform. During the morning I attended
the motions of the cottagers; and when they were dispersed in various
occupations, I slept: the remainder of the day was spent in observing my
friends. When they had retired to rest, if there was any moon, or the
night was star-light, I went into the woods, and collected my own food
and fuel for the cottage. When I returned, as often as it was necessary,
I cleared their path from the snow, and performed those offices that I
had seen done by Felix. I afterwards found that these labours, performed
by an invisible hand, greatly astonished them; and once or twice I heard
them, on these occasions, utter the words _good spirit_, _wonderful_;
but I did not then understand the signification of these terms.

"My thoughts now became more active, and I longed to discover the
motives and feelings of these lovely creatures; I was inquisitive to
know why Felix appeared so miserable, and Agatha so sad. I thought
(foolish wretch!) that it might be in my power to restore happiness to
these deserving people. When I slept, or was absent, the forms of the
venerable blind father, the gentle Agatha, and the excellent Felix,
flitted before me. I looked upon them as superior beings, who would be
the arbiters of my future destiny. I formed in my imagination a thousand
pictures of presenting myself to them, and their reception of me. I
imagined that they would be disgusted, until, by my gentle demeanour and
conciliating words, I should first win their favour, and afterwards
their love.

"These thoughts exhilarated me, and led me to apply with fresh ardour to
the acquiring the art of language. My organs were indeed harsh, but
supple; and although my voice was very unlike the soft music of their
tones, yet I pronounced such words as I understood with tolerable ease.
It was as the ass and the lap-dog; yet surely the gentle ass, whose
intentions were affectionate, although his manners were rude, deserved
better treatment than blows and execration.

"The pleasant showers and genial warmth of spring greatly altered the
aspect of the earth. Men, who before this change seemed to have been hid
in caves, dispersed themselves, and were employed in various arts of
cultivation. The birds sang in more cheerful notes, and the leaves
began to bud forth on the trees. Happy, happy earth! fit habitation for
gods, which, so short a time before, was bleak, damp, and unwholesome.
My spirits were elevated by the enchanting appearance of nature; the
past was blotted from my memory, the present was tranquil, and the
future gilded by bright rays of hope, and anticipations of joy."






"I now hasten to the more moving part of my story. I shall relate events
that impressed me with feelings which, from what I was, have made me
what I am.

"Spring advanced rapidly; the weather became fine, and the skies
cloudless. It surprised me, that what before was desert and gloomy
should now bloom with the most beautiful flowers and verdure. My senses
were gratified and refreshed by a thousand scents of delight, and a
thousand sights of beauty.

"It was on one of these days, when my cottagers periodically rested from
labour--the old man played on his guitar, and the children listened to
him--I observed that the countenance of Felix was melancholy beyond
expression: he sighed frequently; and once his father paused in his
music, and I conjectured by his manner that he inquired the cause of his
son's sorrow. Felix replied in a cheerful accent, and the old man was
recommencing his music, when some one tapped at the door.

"It was a lady on horseback, accompanied by a countryman as a guide. The
lady was dressed in a dark suit, and covered with a thick black veil.
Agatha asked a question; to which the stranger only replied by
pronouncing, in a sweet accent, the name of Felix. Her voice was
musical, but unlike that of either of my friends. On hearing this word,
Felix came up hastily to the lady; who, when she saw him, threw up her
veil, and I beheld a countenance of angelic beauty and expression. Her
hair of a shining raven black, and curiously braided; her eyes were
dark, but gentle, although animated; her features of a regular
proportion, and her complexion wondrously fair, each cheek tinged with a
lovely pink.

"Felix seemed ravished with delight when he saw her, every trait of
sorrow vanished from his face, and it instantly expressed a degree of
ecstatic joy, of which I could hardly have believed it capable; his eyes
sparkled, as his cheek flushed with pleasure; and at that moment I
thought him as beautiful as the stranger. She appeared affected by
different feelings; wiping a few tears from her lovely eyes, she held
out her hand to Felix, who kissed it rapturously, and called her, as
well as I could distinguish, his sweet Arabian. She did not appear to
understand him, but smiled. He assisted her to dismount, and, dismissing
her guide, conducted her into the cottage. Some conversation took place
between him and his father; and the young stranger knelt at the old
man's feet, and would have kissed his hand, but he raised her, and
embraced her affectionately.

"I soon perceived, that although the stranger uttered articulate sounds,
and appeared to have a language of her own, she was neither understood
by, or herself understood, the cottagers. They made many signs which I
did not comprehend; but I saw that her presence diffused gladness
through the cottage, dispelling their sorrow as the sun dissipates the
morning mists. Felix seemed peculiarly happy, and with smiles of delight
welcomed his Arabian. Agatha, the ever-gentle Agatha, kissed the hands
of the lovely stranger; and, pointing to her brother, made signs which
appeared to me to mean that he had been sorrowful until she came. Some
hours passed thus, while they, by their countenances, expressed joy, the
cause of which I did not comprehend. Presently I found, by the frequent
recurrence of one sound which the stranger repeated after them, that she
was endeavouring to learn their language; and the idea instantly
occurred to me, that I should make use of the same instructions to the
same end. The stranger learned about twenty words at the first lesson,
most of them indeed were those which I had before understood, but I
profited by the others.

"As night came on, Agatha and the Arabian retired early. When they
separated, Felix kissed the hand of the stranger, and said, 'Good night,
sweet Safie.' He sat up much longer, conversing with his father; and, by
the frequent repetition of her name, I conjectured that their lovely
guest was the subject of their conversation. I ardently desired to
understand them, and bent every faculty towards that purpose, but found
it utterly impossible.

"The next morning Felix went out to his work; and, after the usual
occupations of Agatha were finished, the Arabian sat at the feet of the
old man, and, taking his guitar, played some airs so entrancingly
beautiful, that they at once drew tears of sorrow and delight from my
eyes. She sang, and her voice flowed in a rich cadence, swelling or
dying away, like a nightingale of the woods.

"When she had finished, she gave the guitar to Agatha, who at first
declined it. She played a simple air, and her voice accompanied it in
sweet accents, but unlike the wondrous strain of the stranger. The old
man appeared enraptured, and said some words, which Agatha endeavoured
to explain to Safie, and by which he appeared to wish to express that
she bestowed on him the greatest delight by her music.

"The days now passed as peaceably as before, with the sole alteration,
that joy had taken place of sadness in the countenances of my friends.
Safie was always gay and happy; she and I improved rapidly in the
knowledge of language, so that in two months I began to comprehend most
of the words uttered by my protectors.

"In the meanwhile also the black ground was covered with herbage, and
the green banks interspersed with innumerable flowers, sweet to the
scent and the eyes, stars of pale radiance among the moonlight woods;
the sun became warmer, the nights clear and balmy; and my nocturnal
rambles were an extreme pleasure to me, although they were considerably
shortened by the late setting and early rising of the sun; for I never
ventured abroad during daylight, fearful of meeting with the same
treatment as I had formerly endured in the first village which I
entered.

"My days were spent in close attention, that I might more speedily
master the language; and I may boast that I improved more rapidly than
the Arabian, who understood very little, and conversed in broken
accents, whilst I comprehended and could imitate almost every word that
was spoken.

"While I improved in speech, I also learned the science of letters, as it
was taught to the stranger; and this opened before me a wide field for
wonder and delight.

"The book from which Felix instructed Safie was Volney's _Ruins of
Empires_. I should not have understood the purport of this book, had not
Felix, in reading it, given very minute explanations. He had chosen this
work, he said, because the declamatory style was framed in imitation of
the eastern authors. Through this work I obtained a cursory knowledge of
history, and a view of the several empires at present existing in the
world; it gave me an insight into the manners, governments, and
religions of the different nations of the earth. I heard of the slothful
Asiatics; of the stupendous genius and mental activity of the Grecians;
of the wars and wonderful virtue of the early Romans--of their
subsequent degeneration--of the decline of that mighty empire; of
chivalry, Christianity, and kings. I heard of the discovery of the
American hemisphere, and wept with Safie over the hapless fate of its
original inhabitants.

"These wonderful narrations inspired me with strange feelings. Was man,
indeed, at once so powerful, so virtuous, and magnificent, yet so
vicious and base? He appeared at one time a mere scion of the evil
principle, and at another as all that can be conceived of noble and
godlike. To be a great and virtuous man appeared the highest honour that
can befall a sensitive being; to be base and vicious, as many on record
have been, appeared the lowest degradation, a condition more abject than
that of the blind mole or harmless worm. For a long time I could not
conceive how one man could go forth to murder his fellow, or even why
there were laws and governments; but when I heard details of vice and
bloodshed, my wonder ceased, and I turned away with disgust and
loathing.

"Every conversation of the cottagers now opened new wonders to me. While
I listened to the instructions which Felix bestowed upon the Arabian,
the strange system of human society was explained to me. I heard of the
division of property, of immense wealth and squalid poverty; of rank,
descent, and noble blood.

"The words induced me to turn towards myself. I learned that the
possessions most esteemed by your fellow-creatures were, high and
unsullied descent united with riches. A man might be respected with only
one of these acquisitions; but without either he was considered, except
in very rare instances, as a vagabond and a slave, doomed to waste his
powers for the profit of the chosen few. And what was I? Of my creation
and creator I was absolutely ignorant; but I knew that I possessed no
money, no friends, no kind of property. I was, besides, endowed with a
figure hideously deformed and loathsome; I was not even of the same
nature as man. I was more agile than they, and could subsist upon
coarser diet; I bore the extremes of heat and cold with less injury to
my frame; my stature far exceeded their's. When I looked around, I saw
and heard of none like me. Was I then a monster, a blot upon the earth,
from which all men fled, and whom all men disowned?

"I cannot describe to you the agony that these reflections inflicted
upon me; I tried to dispel them, but sorrow only increased with
knowledge. Oh, that I had for ever remained in my native wood, nor known
or felt beyond the sensations of hunger, thirst, and heat!

"Of what a strange nature is knowledge! It clings to the mind, when it
has once seized on it, like a lichen on the rock. I wished sometimes to
shake off all thought and feeling; but I learned that there was but one
means to overcome the sensation of pain, and that was death--a state
which I feared yet did not understand. I admired virtue and good
feelings, and loved the gentle manners and amiable qualities of my
cottagers; but I was shut out from intercourse with them, except through
means which I obtained by stealth, when I was unseen and unknown, and
which rather increased than satisfied the desire I had of becoming one
among my fellows. The gentle words of Agatha, and the animated smiles of
the charming Arabian, were not for me. The mild exhortations of the old
man, and the lively conversation of the loved Felix, were not for me.
Miserable, unhappy wretch!

"Other lessons were impressed upon me even more deeply. I heard of the
difference of sexes; of the birth and growth of children; how the father
doated on the smiles of the infant, and the lively sallies of the older
child; how all the life and cares of the mother were wrapt up in the
precious charge; how the mind of youth expanded and gained knowledge; of
brother, sister, and all the various relationships which bind one human
being to another in mutual bonds.

"But where were my friends and relations? No father had watched my
infant days, no mother had blessed me with smiles and caresses; or if
they had, all my past life was now a blot, a blind vacancy in which I
distinguished nothing. From my earliest remembrance I had been as I then
was in height and proportion. I had never yet seen a being resembling
me, or who claimed any intercourse with me. What was I? The question
again recurred, to be answered only with groans.

"I will soon explain to what these feelings tended; but allow me now to
return to the cottagers, whose story excited in me such various feelings
of indignation, delight, and wonder, but which all terminated in
additional love and reverence for my protectors (for so I loved, in an
innocent, half painful self-deceit, to call them)."






"Some time elapsed before I learned the history of my friends. It was
one which could not fail to impress itself deeply on my mind, unfolding
as it did a number of circumstances each interesting and wonderful to
one so utterly inexperienced as I was.

"The name of the old man was De Lacey. He was descended from a good
family in France, where he had lived for many years in affluence,
respected by his superiors, and beloved by his equals. His son was bred
in the service of his country; and Agatha had ranked with ladies of the
highest distinction. A few months before my arrival, they had lived in a
large and luxurious city, called Paris, surrounded by friends, and
possessed of every enjoyment which virtue, refinement of intellect, or
taste, accompanied by a moderate fortune, could afford.

"The father of Safie had been the cause of their ruin. He was a Turkish
merchant, and had inhabited Paris for many years, when, for some reason
which I could not learn, he became obnoxious to the government. He was
seized and cast into prison the very day that Safie arrived from
Constantinople to join him. He was tried, and condemned to death. The
injustice of his sentence was very flagrant; all Paris was indignant;
and it was judged that his religion and wealth, rather than the crime
alleged against him, had been the cause of his condemnation.

"Felix had been present at the trial; his horror and indignation were
uncontrollable, when he heard the decision of the court. He made, at
that moment, a solemn vow to deliver him, and then looked around for the
means. After many fruitless attempts to gain admittance to the prison,
he found a strongly grated window in an unguarded part of the building,
which lighted the dungeon of the unfortunate Mahometan; who, loaded with
chains, waited in despair the execution of the barbarous sentence. Felix
visited the grate at night, and made known to the prisoner his
intentions in his favour. The Turk, amazed and delighted, endeavoured to
kindle the zeal of his deliverer by promises of reward and wealth. Felix
rejected his offers with contempt; yet when he saw the lovely Safie, who
was allowed to visit her father, and who, by her gestures, expressed her
lively gratitude, the youth could not help owning to his own mind, that
the captive possessed a treasure which would fully reward his toil and
hazard.

"The Turk quickly perceived the impression that his daughter had made on
the heart of Felix, and endeavoured to secure him more entirely in his
interests by the promise of her hand in marriage, so soon as he should
be conveyed to a place of safety. Felix was too delicate to accept this
offer; yet he looked forward to the probability of that event as to the
consummation of his happiness.

"During the ensuing days, while the preparations were going forward for
the escape of the merchant, the zeal of Felix was warmed by several
letters that he received from this lovely girl, who found means to
express her thoughts in the language of her lover by the aid of an old
man, a servant of her father's, who understood French. She thanked him
in the most ardent terms for his intended services towards her father;
and at the same time she gently deplored her own fate.

"I have copies of these letters; for I found means, during my residence
in the hovel, to procure the implements of writing; and the letters were
often in the hands of Felix or Agatha. Before I depart, I will give them
to you, they will prove the truth of my tale; but at present, as the
sun is already far declined, I shall only have time to repeat the
substance of them to you.

"Safie related, that her mother was a Christian Arab, seized and made a
slave by the Turks; recommended by her beauty, she had won the heart of
the father of Safie, who married her. The young girl spoke in high and
enthusiastic terms of her mother, who, born in freedom spurned the
bondage to which she was now reduced. She instructed her daughter in the
tenets of her religion, and taught her to aspire to higher powers of
intellect, and an independence of spirit, forbidden to the female
followers of Mahomet. This lady died; but her lessons were indelibly
impressed on the mind of Safie, who sickened at the prospect of again
returning to Asia, and the being immured within the walls of a haram,
allowed only to occupy herself with puerile amusements, ill suited to
the temper of her soul, now accustomed to grand ideas and a noble
emulation for virtue. The prospect of marrying a Christian, and
remaining in a country where women were allowed to take a rank in
society, was enchanting to her.

"The day for the execution of the Turk was fixed; but, on the night
previous to it, he had quitted prison, and before morning was distant
many leagues from Paris. Felix had procured passports in the name of his
father, sister, and himself. He had previously communicated his plan to
the former, who aided the deceit by quitting his house, under the
pretence of a journey, and concealed himself, with his daughter, in an
obscure part of Paris.

"Felix conducted the fugitives through France to Lyons, and across Mont
Cenis to Leghorn, where the merchant had decided to wait a favourable
opportunity of passing into some part of the Turkish dominions.

"Safie resolved to remain with her father until the moment of his
departure, before which time the Turk renewed his promise that she
should be united to his deliverer; and Felix remained with them in
expectation of that event; and in the mean time he enjoyed the society
of the Arabian, who exhibited towards him the simplest and tenderest
affection. They conversed with one another through the means of an
interpreter, and sometimes with the interpretation of looks; and Safie
sang to him the divine airs of her native country.

"The Turk allowed this intimacy to take place, and encouraged the hopes
of the youthful lovers, while in his heart he had formed far other
plans. He loathed the idea that his daughter should be united to a
Christian; but he feared the resentment of Felix if he should appear
lukewarm; for he knew that he was still in the power of his deliverer,
if he should choose to betray him to the Italian state which they
inhabited. He revolved a thousand plans by which he should be enabled to
prolong the deceit until it might be no longer necessary, and secretly
to take his daughter with him when he departed. His plans were greatly
facilitated by the news which arrived from Paris.

"The government of France were greatly enraged at the escape of their
victim, and spared no pains to detect and punish his deliverer. The plot
of Felix was quickly discovered, and De Lacey and Agatha were thrown
into prison. The news reached Felix, and roused him from his dream of
pleasure. His blind and aged father, and his gentle sister, lay in a
noisome dungeon, while he enjoyed the free air, and the society of her
whom he loved. This idea was torture to him. He quickly arranged with
the Turk, that if the latter should find a favourable opportunity for
escape before Felix could return to Italy, Safie should remain as a
boarder at a convent at Leghorn; and then, quitting the lovely Arabian,
he hastened to Paris, and delivered himself up to the vengeance of the
law, hoping to free De Lacey and Agatha by this proceeding.

"He did not succeed. They remained confined for five months before the
trial took place; the result of which deprived them of their fortune,
and condemned them to a perpetual exile from their native country.

"They found a miserable asylum in the cottage in Germany, where I
discovered them. Felix soon learned that the treacherous Turk, for whom
he and his family endured such unheard-of oppression, on discovering
that his deliverer was thus reduced to poverty and impotence, became a
traitor to good feeling and honour, and had quitted Italy with his
daughter, insultingly sending Felix a pittance of money to aid him, as
he said, in some plan of future maintenance.

"Such were the events that preyed on the heart of Felix, and rendered
him, when I first saw him, the most miserable of his family. He could
have endured poverty, and when this distress had been the meed of his
virtue, he would have gloried in it: but the ingratitude of the Turk,
and the loss of his beloved Safie, were misfortunes more bitter and
irreparable. The arrival of the Arabian now infused new life into his
soul.

"When the news reached Leghorn, that Felix was deprived of his wealth
and rank, the merchant commanded his daughter to think no more of her
lover, but to prepare to return with him to her native country. The
generous nature of Safie was outraged by this command; she attempted to
expostulate with her father, but he left her angrily, reiterating his
tyrannical mandate.

"A few days after, the Turk entered his daughter's apartment, and told
her hastily, that he had reason to believe that his residence at Leghorn
had been divulged, and that he should speedily be delivered up to the
French government; he had, consequently, hired a vessel to convey him
to Constantinople, for which city he should sail in a few hours. He
intended to leave his daughter under the care of a confidential servant,
to follow at her leisure with the greater part of his property, which
had not yet arrived at Leghorn.

"When alone, Safie resolved in her own mind the plan of conduct that it
would become her to pursue in this emergency. A residence in Turkey was
abhorrent to her; her religion and feelings were alike adverse to it. By
some papers of her father's, which fell into her hands, she heard of the
exile of her lover, and learnt the name of the spot where he then
resided. She hesitated some time, but at length she formed her
determination. Taking with her some jewels that belonged to her, and a
small sum of money, she quitted Italy, with an attendant, a native of
Leghorn, but who understood the common language of Turkey, and departed
for Germany.

"She arrived in safety at a town about twenty leagues from the cottage
of De Lacey, when her attendant fell dangerously ill. Safie nursed her
with the most devoted affection; but the poor girl died, and the Arabian
was left alone, unacquainted with the language of the country, and
utterly ignorant of the customs of the world. She fell, however, into
good hands. The Italian had mentioned the name of the spot for which
they were bound; and, after her death, the woman of the house in which
they had lived took care that Safie should arrive in safety at the
cottage of her lover."






"Such was the history of my beloved cottagers. It impressed me deeply. I
learned, from the views of social life which it developed, to admire
their virtues, and to deprecate the vices of mankind.

"As yet I looked upon crime as a distant evil; benevolence and
generosity were ever present before me, inciting within me a desire to
become an actor in the busy scene where so many admirable qualities were
called forth and displayed. But, in giving an account of the progress of
my intellect, I must not omit a circumstance which occurred in the
beginning of the month of August of the same year.

"One night, during my accustomed visit to the neighbouring wood, where I
collected my own food, and brought home firing for my protectors, I
found on the ground a leathern portmanteau, containing several articles
of dress and some books. I eagerly seized the prize, and returned with
it to my hovel. Fortunately the books were written in the language the
elements of which I had acquired at the cottage; they consisted of
_Paradise Lost_, a volume of _Plutarch's Lives_, and the _Sorrows of
Werter_. The possession of these treasures gave me extreme delight; I
now continually studied and exercised my mind upon these histories,
whilst my friends were employed in their ordinary occupations.

"I can hardly describe to you the effect of these books. They produced
in me an infinity of new images and feelings, that sometimes raised me
to ecstacy, but more frequently sunk me into the lowest dejection. In
the _Sorrows of Werter_, besides the interest of its simple and
affecting story, so many opinions are canvassed, and so many lights
thrown upon what had hitherto been to me obscure subjects, that I found
in it a never-ending source of speculation and astonishment. The gentle
and domestic manners it described, combined with lofty sentiments and
feelings, which had for their object something out of self, accorded
well with my experience among my protectors, and with the wants which
were for ever alive in my own bosom. But I thought Werter himself a more
divine being than I had ever beheld or imagined; his character contained
no pretension, but it sunk deep. The disquisitions upon death and
suicide were calculated to fill me with wonder. I did not pretend to
enter into the merits of the case, yet I inclined towards the opinions
of the hero, whose extinction I wept, without precisely understanding
it.

"As I read, however, I applied much personally to my own feelings and
condition. I found myself similar, yet at the same time strangely unlike
the beings concerning whom I read, and to whose conversation I was a
listener. I sympathized with, and partly understood them, but I was
unformed in mind; I was dependent on none, and related to none. 'The
path of my departure was free;' and there was none to lament my
annihilation. My person was hideous, and my stature gigantic: what did
this mean? Who was I? What was I? Whence did I come? What was my
destination? These questions continually recurred, but I was unable to
solve them.

"The volume of _Plutarch's Lives_ which I possessed, contained the
histories of the first founders of the ancient republics. This book had
a far different effect upon me from the _Sorrows of Werter_. I learned
from Werter's imaginations despondency and gloom: but Plutarch taught me
high thoughts; he elevated me above the wretched sphere of my own
reflections, to admire and love the heroes of past ages. Many things I
read surpassed my understanding and experience. I had a very confused
knowledge of kingdoms, wide extents of country, mighty rivers, and
boundless seas. But I was perfectly unacquainted with towns, and large
assemblages of men. The cottage of my protectors had been the only
school in which I had studied human nature; but this book developed new
and mightier scenes of action. I read of men concerned in public affairs
governing or massacring their species. I felt the greatest ardour for
virtue rise within me, and abhorrence for vice, as far as I understood
the signification of those terms, relative as they were, as I applied
them, to pleasure and pain alone. Induced by these feelings, I was of
course led to admire peaceable law-givers, Numa, Solon, and Lycurgus,
in preference to Romulus and Theseus. The patriarchal lives of my
protectors caused these impressions to take a firm hold on my mind;
perhaps, if my first introduction to humanity had been made by a young
soldier, burning for glory and slaughter, I should have been imbued with
different sensations.

"But _Paradise Lost_ excited different and far deeper emotions. I read
it, as I had read the other volumes which had fallen into my hands, as a
true history. It moved every feeling of wonder and awe, that the picture
of an omnipotent God warring with his creatures was capable of exciting.
I often referred the several situations, as their similarity struck me,
to my own. Like Adam, I was created apparently united by no link to any
other being in existence; but his state was far different from mine in
every other respect. He had come forth from the hands of God a perfect
creature, happy and prosperous, guarded by the especial care of his
Creator; he was allowed to converse with, and acquire knowledge from
beings of a superior nature: but I was wretched, helpless, and alone.
Many times I considered Satan as the fitter emblem of my condition; for
often, like him, when I viewed the bliss of my protectors, the bitter
gall of envy rose within me.

"Another circumstance strengthened and confirmed these feelings. Soon
after my arrival in the hovel, I discovered some papers in the pocket of
the dress which I had taken from your laboratory. At first I had
neglected them; but now that I was able to decypher the characters in
which they were written, I began to study them with diligence. It was
your journal of the four months that preceded my creation. You minutely
described in these papers every step you took in the progress of your
work; this history was mingled with accounts of domestic occurrences.
You, doubtless, recollect these papers. Here they are. Every thing is
related in them which bears reference to my accursed origin; the whole
detail of that series of disgusting circumstances which produced it is
set in view; the minutest description of my odious and loathsome person
is given, in language which painted your own horrors, and rendered mine
ineffaceable. I sickened as I read. 'Hateful day when I received life!'
I exclaimed in agony. 'Cursed creator! Why did you form a monster so
hideous that even you turned from me in disgust? God in pity made man
beautiful and alluring, after his own image; but my form is a filthy
type of your's, more horrid from its very resemblance. Satan had his
companions, fellow-devils, to admire and encourage him; but I am
solitary and detested.'

"These were the reflections of my hours of despondency and solitude; but
when I contemplated the virtues of the cottagers, their amiable and
benevolent dispositions, I persuaded myself that when they should become
acquainted with my admiration of their virtues, they would compassionate
me, and overlook my personal deformity. Could they turn from their door
one, however monstrous, who solicited their compassion and friendship?
I resolved, at least, not to despair, but in every way to fit myself for
an interview with them which would decide my fate. I postponed this
attempt for some months longer; for the importance attached to its
success inspired me with a dread lest I should fail. Besides, I found
that my understanding improved so much with every day's experience, that
I was unwilling to commence this undertaking until a few more months
should have added to my wisdom.

"Several changes, in the mean time, took place in the cottage. The
presence of Safie diffused happiness among its inhabitants; and I also
found that a greater degree of plenty reigned there. Felix and Agatha
spent more time in amusement and conversation, and were assisted in
their labours by servants. They did not appear rich, but they were
contented and happy; their feelings were serene and peaceful, while mine
became every day more tumultuous. Increase of knowledge only discovered
to me more clearly what a wretched outcast I was. I cherished hope, it
is true; but it vanished, when I beheld my person reflected in water, or
my shadow in the moon-shine, even as that frail image and that
inconstant shade.

"I endeavoured to crush these fears, and to fortify myself for the trial
which in a few months I resolved to undergo; and sometimes I allowed my
thoughts, unchecked by reason, to ramble in the fields of Paradise, and
dared to fancy amiable and lovely creatures sympathizing with my
feelings and cheering my gloom; their angelic countenances breathed
smiles of consolation. But it was all a dream: no Eve soothed my
sorrows, or shared my thoughts; I was alone. I remembered Adam's
supplication to his Creator; but where was mine? he had abandoned me,
and, in the bitterness of my heart, I cursed him.

"Autumn passed thus. I saw, with surprise and grief, the leaves decay
and fall, and nature again assume the barren and bleak appearance it had
worn when I first beheld the woods and the lovely moon. Yet I did not
heed the bleakness of the weather; I was better fitted by my
conformation for the endurance of cold than heat. But my chief delights
were the sight of the flowers, the birds, and all the gay apparel of
summer; when those deserted me, I turned with more attention towards the
cottagers. Their happiness was not decreased by the absence of summer.
They loved, and sympathized with one another; and their joys, depending
on each other, were not interrupted by the casualties that took place
around them. The more I saw of them, the greater became my desire to
claim their protection and kindness; my heart yearned to be known and
loved by these amiable creatures: to see their sweet looks turned
towards me with affection, was the utmost limit of my ambition. I dared
not think that they would turn them from me with disdain and horror. The
poor that stopped at their door were never driven away. I asked, it is
true, for greater treasures than a little food or rest; I required
kindness and sympathy; but I did not believe myself utterly unworthy of
it.

"The winter advanced, and an entire revolution of the seasons had taken
place since I awoke into life. My attention, at this time, was solely
directed towards my plan of introducing myself into the cottage of my
protectors. I revolved many projects; but that on which I finally fixed
was, to enter the dwelling when the blind old man should be alone. I had
sagacity enough to discover, that the unnatural hideousness of my person
was the chief object of horror with those who had formerly beheld me. My
voice, although harsh, had nothing terrible in it; I thought, therefore,
that if, in the absence of his children, I could gain the good-will and
mediation of the old De Lacy, I might, by his means, be tolerated by my
younger protectors.

"One day, when the sun shone on the red leaves that strewed the ground,
and diffused cheerfulness, although it denied warmth, Safie, Agatha, and
Felix, departed on a long country walk, and the old man, at his own
desire, was left alone in the cottage. When his children had departed,
he took up his guitar, and played several mournful, but sweet airs, more
sweet and mournful than I had ever heard him play before. At first his
countenance was illuminated with pleasure, but, as he continued,
thoughtfulness and sadness succeeded; at length, laying aside the
instrument, he sat absorbed in reflection.

"My heart beat quick; this was the hour and moment of trial, which
would decide my hopes, or realize my fears. The servants were gone to a
neighbouring fair. All was silent in and around the cottage: it was an
excellent opportunity; yet, when I proceeded to execute my plan, my
limbs failed me, and I sunk to the ground. Again I rose; and, exerting
all the firmness of which I was master, removed the planks which I had
placed before my hovel to conceal my retreat. The fresh air revived me,
and, with renewed determination, I approached the door of their cottage.

"I knocked. 'Who is there?' said the old man--'Come in.'

"I entered; 'Pardon this intrusion,' said I, 'I am a traveller in want
of a little rest; you would greatly oblige me, if you would allow me to
remain a few minutes before the fire.'

"'Enter,' said De Lacy; 'and I will try in what manner I can relieve
your wants; but, unfortunately, my children are from home, and, as I am
blind, I am afraid I shall find it difficult to procure food for you.'

"'Do not trouble yourself, my kind host, I have food; it is warmth and
rest only that I need.'

"I sat down, and a silence ensued. I knew that every minute was precious
to me, yet I remained irresolute in what manner to commence the
interview; when the old man addressed me--

"'By your language, stranger, I suppose you are my countryman;--are you
French?'

"'No; but I was educated by a French family, and understand that
language only. I am now going to claim the protection of some friends,
whom I sincerely love, and of whose favour I have some hopes.'

"'Are these Germans?'

"'No, they are French. But let us change the subject. I am an
unfortunate and deserted creature; I look around, and I have no relation
or friend upon earth. These amiable people to whom I go have never seen
me, and know little of me. I am full of fears; for if I fail there, I am
an outcast in the world for ever.'

"'Do not despair. To be friendless is indeed to be unfortunate; but the
hearts of men, when unprejudiced by any obvious self-interest, are full
of brotherly love and charity. Rely, therefore, on your hopes; and if
these friends are good and amiable, do not despair.'

"'They are kind--they are the most excellent creatures in the world;
but, unfortunately, they are prejudiced against me. I have good
dispositions; my life has been hitherto harmless, and, in some degree,
beneficial; but a fatal prejudice clouds their eyes, and where they
ought to see a feeling and kind friend, they behold only a detestable
monster.'

"'That is indeed unfortunate; but if you are really blameless, cannot
you undeceive them?'

"'I am about to undertake that task; and it is on that account that I
feel so many overwhelming terrors. I tenderly love these friends; I
have, unknown to them, been for many months in the habits of daily
kindness towards them; but they believe that I wish to injure them, and
it is that prejudice which I wish to overcome.'

"'Where do these friends reside?'

"'Near this spot.'

"The old man paused, and then continued, 'If you will unreservedly
confide to me the particulars of your tale, I perhaps may be of use in
undeceiving them. I am blind, and cannot judge of your countenance, but
there is something in your words which persuades me that you are
sincere. I am poor, and an exile; but it will afford me true pleasure to
be in any way serviceable to a human creature.'

"'Excellent man! I thank you, and accept your generous offer. You raise
me from the dust by this kindness; and I trust that, by your aid, I
shall not be driven from the society and sympathy of your
fellow-creatures.'

"'Heaven forbid! even if you were really criminal; for that can only
drive you to desperation, and not instigate you to virtue. I also am
unfortunate; I and my family have been condemned, although innocent:
judge, therefore, if I do not feel for your misfortunes.'

"'How can I thank you, my best and only benefactor? from your lips first
have I heard the voice of kindness directed towards me; I shall be for
ever grateful; and your present humanity assures me of success with
those friends whom I am on the point of meeting.'

"'May I know the names and residence of those friends?'

"I paused. This, I thought, was the moment of decision, which was to rob
me of, or bestow happiness on me for ever. I struggled vainly for
firmness sufficient to answer him, but the effort destroyed all my
remaining strength; I sank on the chair, and sobbed aloud. At that
moment I heard the steps of my younger protectors. I had not a moment to
lose; but, seizing the hand of the old man, I cried, 'Now is the
time!--save and protect me! You and your family are the friends whom I
seek. Do not you desert me in the hour of trial!'

"'Great God!' exclaimed the old man, 'who are you?'

"At that instant the cottage door was opened, and Felix, Safie, and
Agatha entered. Who can describe their horror and consternation on
beholding me? Agatha fainted; and Safie, unable to attend to her friend,
rushed out of the cottage. Felix darted forward, and with supernatural
force tore me from his father, to whose knees I clung: in a transport of
fury, he dashed me to the ground, and struck me violently with a stick.
I could have torn him limb from limb, as the lion rends the antelope.
But my heart sunk within me as with bitter sickness, and I refrained. I
saw him on the point of repeating his blow, when, overcome by pain and
anguish, I quitted the cottage, and in the general tumult escaped
unperceived to my hovel."






"Cursed, cursed creator! Why did I live? Why, in that instant, did I not
extinguish the spark of existence which you had so wantonly bestowed? I
know not; despair had not yet taken possession of me; my feelings were
those of rage and revenge. I could with pleasure have destroyed the
cottage and its inhabitants, and have glutted myself with their shrieks
and misery.

"When night came, I quitted my retreat, and wandered in the wood; and
now, no longer restrained by the fear of discovery, I gave vent to my
anguish in fearful howlings. I was like a wild beast that had broken the
toils; destroying the objects that obstructed me, and ranging through
the wood with a stag-like swiftness. Oh! what a miserable night I
passed! the cold stars shone in mockery, and the bare trees waved their
branches above me: now and then the sweet voice of a bird burst forth
amidst the universal stillness. All, save I, were at rest or in
enjoyment: I, like the arch fiend, bore a hell within me; and, finding
myself unsympathized with, wished to tear up the trees, spread havoc and
destruction around me, and then to have sat down and enjoyed the ruin.

"But this was a luxury of sensation that could not endure; I became
fatigued with excess of bodily exertion, and sank on the damp grass in
the sick impotence of despair. There was none among the myriads of men
that existed who would pity or assist me; and should I feel kindness
towards my enemies? No: from that moment I declared everlasting war
against the species, and, more than all, against him who had formed me,
and sent me forth to this insupportable misery.

"The sun rose; I heard the voices of men, and knew that it was
impossible to return to my retreat during that day. Accordingly I hid
myself in some thick underwood, determining to devote the ensuing hours
to reflection on my situation.

"The pleasant sunshine, and the pure air of day, restored me to some
degree of tranquillity; and when I considered what had passed at the
cottage, I could not help believing that I had been too hasty in my
conclusions. I had certainly acted imprudently. It was apparent that my
conversation had interested the father in my behalf, and I was a fool in
having exposed my person to the horror of his children. I ought to have
familiarized the old De Lacy to me, and by degrees have discovered
myself to the rest of his family, when they should have been prepared
for my approach. But I did not believe my errors to be irretrievable;
and, after much consideration, I resolved to return to the cottage, seek
the old man, and by my representations win him to my party.

"These thoughts calmed me, and in the afternoon I sank into a profound
sleep; but the fever of my blood did not allow me to be visited by
peaceful dreams. The horrible scene of the preceding day was for ever
acting before my eyes; the females were flying, and the enraged Felix
tearing me from his father's feet. I awoke exhausted; and, finding that
it was already night, I crept forth from my hiding-place, and went in
search of food.

"When my hunger was appeased, I directed my steps towards the well-known
path that conducted to the cottage. All there was at peace. I crept into
my hovel, and remained in silent expectation of the accustomed hour when
the family arose. That hour past, the sun mounted high in the heavens,
but the cottagers did not appear. I trembled violently, apprehending
some dreadful misfortune. The inside of the cottage was dark, and I
heard no motion; I cannot describe the agony of this suspence.

"Presently two countrymen passed by; but, pausing near the cottage, they
entered into conversation, using violent gesticulations; but I did not
understand what they said, as they spoke the language of the country,
which differed from that of my protectors. Soon after, however, Felix
approached with another man: I was surprised, as I knew that he had not
quitted the cottage that morning, and waited anxiously to discover, from
his discourse, the meaning of these unusual appearances.

"'Do you consider,' said his companion to him, 'that you will be obliged
to pay three months' rent, and to lose the produce of your garden? I do
not wish to take any unfair advantage, and I beg therefore that you will
take some days to consider of your determination.'

"'It is utterly useless,' replied Felix, 'we can never again inhabit
your cottage. The life of my father is in the greatest danger, owing to
the dreadful circumstance that I have related. My wife and my sister
will never recover their horror. I entreat you not to reason with me any
more. Take possession of your tenement, and let me fly from this place.'

"Felix trembled violently as he said this. He and his companion entered
the cottage, in which they remained for a few minutes, and then
departed. I never saw any of the family of De Lacy more.

"I continued for the remainder of the day in my hovel in a state of
utter and stupid despair. My protectors had departed, and had broken the
only link that held me to the world. For the first time the feelings of
revenge and hatred filled my bosom, and I did not strive to controul
them; but, allowing myself to be borne away by the stream, I bent my
mind towards injury and death. When I thought of my friends, of the mild
voice of De Lacy, the gentle eyes of Agatha, and the exquisite beauty of
the Arabian, these thoughts vanished, and a gush of tears somewhat
soothed me. But again, when I reflected that they had spurned and
deserted me, anger returned, a rage of anger; and, unable to injure any
thing human, I turned my fury towards inanimate objects. As night
advanced, I placed a variety of combustibles around the cottage; and,
after having destroyed every vestige of cultivation in the garden, I
waited with forced impatience until the moon had sunk to commence my
operations.

"As the night advanced, a fierce wind arose from the woods, and quickly
dispersed the clouds that had loitered in the heavens: the blast tore
along like a mighty avalanche, and produced a kind of insanity in my
spirits, that burst all bounds of reason and reflection. I lighted the
dry branch of a tree, and danced with fury around the devoted cottage,
my eyes still fixed on the western horizon, the edge of which the moon
nearly touched. A part of its orb was at length hid, and I waved my
brand; it sunk, and, with a loud scream, I fired the straw, and heath,
and bushes, which I had collected. The wind fanned the fire, and the
cottage was quickly enveloped by the flames, which clung to it, and
licked it with their forked and destroying tongues.

"As soon as I was convinced that no assistance could save any part of
the habitation, I quitted the scene, and sought for refuge in the woods.

"And now, with the world before me, whither should I bend my steps? I
resolved to fly far from the scene of my misfortunes; but to me, hated
and despised, every country must be equally horrible. At length the
thought of you crossed my mind. I learned from your papers that you were
my father, my creator; and to whom could I apply with more fitness than
to him who had given me life? Among the lessons that Felix had bestowed
upon Safie geography had not been omitted: I had learned from these the
relative situations of the different countries of the earth. You had
mentioned Geneva as the name of your native town; and towards this place
I resolved to proceed.

"But how was I to direct myself? I knew that I must travel in a
south-westerly direction to reach my destination; but the sun was my
only guide. I did not know the names of the towns that I was to pass
through, nor could I ask information from a single human being; but I
did not despair. From you only could I hope for succour, although
towards you I felt no sentiment but that of hatred. Unfeeling, heartless
creator! you had endowed me with perceptions and passions, and then cast
me abroad an object for the scorn and horror of mankind. But on you only
had I any claim for pity and redress, and from you I determined to seek
that justice which I vainly attempted to gain from any other being that
wore the human form.

"My travels were long, and the sufferings I endured intense. It was late
in autumn when I quitted the district where I had so long resided. I
travelled only at night, fearful of encountering the visage of a human
being. Nature decayed around me, and the sun became heatless; rain and
snow poured around me; mighty rivers were frozen; the surface of the
earth was hard, and chill, and bare, and I found no shelter. Oh, earth!
how often did I imprecate curses on the cause of my being! The mildness
of my nature had fled, and all within me was turned to gall and
bitterness. The nearer I approached to your habitation, the more deeply
did I feel the spirit of revenge enkindled in my heart. Snow fell, and
the waters were hardened, but I rested not. A few incidents now and then
directed me, and I possessed a map of the country; but I often wandered
wide from my path. The agony of my feelings allowed me no respite: no
incident occurred from which my rage and misery could not extract its
food; but a circumstance that happened when I arrived on the confines of
Switzerland, when the sun had recovered its warmth, and the earth again
began to look green, confirmed in an especial manner the bitterness and
horror of my feelings.

"I generally rested during the day, and travelled only when I was
secured by night from the view of man. One morning, however, finding
that my path lay through a deep wood, I ventured to continue my journey
after the sun had risen; the day, which was one of the first of spring,
cheered even me by the loveliness of its sunshine and the balminess of
the air. I felt emotions of gentleness and pleasure, that had long
appeared dead, revive within me. Half surprised by the novelty of these
sensations, I allowed myself to be borne away by them; and, forgetting
my solitude and deformity, dared to be happy. Soft tears again bedewed
my cheeks, and I even raised my humid eyes with thankfulness towards the
blessed sun which bestowed such joy upon me.

"I continued to wind among the paths of the wood, until I came to its
boundary, which was skirted by a deep and rapid river, into which many
of the trees bent their branches, now budding with the fresh spring.
Here I paused, not exactly knowing what path to pursue, when I heard the
sound of voices, that induced me to conceal myself under the shade of a
cypress. I was scarcely hid, when a young girl came running towards the
spot where I was concealed, laughing as if she ran from some one in
sport. She continued her course along the precipitous sides of the
river, when suddenly her foot slipt, and she fell into the rapid stream.
I rushed from my hiding place, and, with extreme labour from the force
of the current, saved her, and dragged her to shore. She was senseless;
and I endeavoured, by every means in my power, to restore animation,
when I was suddenly interrupted by the approach of a rustic, who was
probably the person from whom she had playfully fled. On seeing me, he
darted towards me, and, tearing the girl from my arms, hastened towards
the deeper parts of the wood. I followed speedily, I hardly knew why;
but when the man saw me draw near, he aimed a gun, which he carried, at
my body, and fired. I sunk to the ground, and my injurer, with increased
swiftness, escaped into the wood.

"This was then the reward of my benevolence! I had saved a human being
from destruction, and, as a recompence, I now writhed under the
miserable pain of a wound, which shattered the flesh and bone. The
feelings of kindness and gentleness, which I had entertained but a few
moments before, gave place to hellish rage and gnashing of teeth.
Inflamed by pain, I vowed eternal hatred and vengeance to all mankind.
But the agony of my wound overcame me; my pulses paused, and I fainted.

"For some weeks I led a miserable life in the woods, endeavouring to
cure the wound which I had received. The ball had entered my shoulder,
and I knew not whether it had remained there or passed through; at any
rate I had no means of extracting it. My sufferings were augmented also
by the oppressive sense of the injustice and ingratitude of their
infliction. My daily vows rose for revenge--a deep and deadly revenge,
such as would alone compensate for the outrages and anguish I had
endured.

"After some weeks my wound healed, and I continued my journey. The
labours I endured were no longer to be alleviated by the bright sun or
gentle breezes of spring; all joy was but a mockery, which insulted my
desolate state, and made me feel more painfully that I was not made for
the enjoyment of pleasure.

"But my toils now drew near a close and, two months from this time, I
reached the environs of Geneva.

"It was evening when I arrived, and I retired to a hiding-place among
the fields that surround it, to meditate in what manner I should apply
to you. I was oppressed by fatigue and hunger, and far too unhappy to
enjoy the gentle breezes of evening, or the prospect of the sun setting
behind the stupendous mountains of Jura.

"At this time a slight sleep relieved me from the pain of reflection,
which was disturbed by the approach of a beautiful child, who came
running into the recess I had chosen with all the sportiveness of
infancy. Suddenly, as I gazed on him, an idea seized me, that this
little creature was unprejudiced, and had lived too short a time to have
imbibed a horror of deformity. If, therefore, I could seize him, and
educate him as my companion and friend, I should not be so desolate in
this peopled earth.

"Urged by this impulse, I seized on the boy as he passed, and drew him
towards me. As soon as he beheld my form, he placed his hands before his
eyes, and uttered a shrill scream: I drew his hand forcibly from his
face, and said, 'Child, what is the meaning of this? I do not intend to
hurt you; listen to me.'

"He struggled violently; 'Let me go,' he cried; 'monster! ugly wretch!
you wish to eat me, and tear me to pieces--You are an ogre--Let me go,
or I will tell my papa.'

"'Boy, you will never see your father again; you must come with me.'

"'Hideous monster! let me go; My papa is a Syndic--he is M.
Joey--he would punish you. You dare not keep me.'

"'Joey! you belong then to my enemy--to him towards whom I have
sworn eternal revenge; you shall be my first victim.'

"The child still struggled, and loaded me with epithets which carried
despair to my heart: I grasped his throat to silence him, and in a
moment he lay dead at my feet.

"I gazed on my victim, and my heart swelled with exultation and hellish
triumph: clapping my hands, I exclaimed, 'I, too, can create desolation;
my enemy is not impregnable; this death will carry despair to him, and a
thousand other miseries shall torment and destroy him.'

"As I fixed my eyes on the child, I saw something glittering on his
breast. I took it; it was a portrait of a most lovely woman. In spite of
my malignity, it softened and attracted me. For a few moments I gazed
with delight on her dark eyes, fringed by deep lashes, and her lovely
lips; but presently my rage returned: I remembered that I was for ever
deprived of the delights that such beautiful creatures could bestow; and
that she whose resemblance I contemplated would, in regarding me, have
changed that air of divine benignity to one expressive of disgust and
affright.

"Can you wonder that such thoughts transported me with rage? I only
wonder that at that moment, instead of venting my sensations in
exclamations and agony, I did not rush among mankind, and perish in the
attempt to destroy them.

"While I was overcome by these feelings, I left the spot where I had
committed the murder, and was seeking a more secluded hiding-place, when
I perceived a woman passing near me. She was young, not indeed so
beautiful as her whose portrait I held, but of an agreeable aspect, and
blooming in the loveliness of youth and health. Here, I thought, is one
of those whose smiles are bestowed on all but me; she shall not escape:
thanks to the lessons of Felix, and the sanguinary laws of man, I have
learned how to work mischief. I approached her unperceived, and placed
the portrait securely in one of the folds of her dress.

"For some days I haunted the spot where these scenes had taken place;
sometimes wishing to see you, sometimes resolved to quit the world and
its miseries for ever. At length I wandered towards these mountains, and
have ranged through their immense recesses, consumed by a burning
passion which you alone can gratify. We may not part until you have
promised to comply with my requisition. I am alone, and miserable; man
will not associate with me; but one as deformed and horrible as myself
would not deny herself to me. My companion must be of the same species,
and have the same defects. This being you must create."






The being finished speaking, and fixed his looks upon me in expectation
of a reply. But I was bewildered, perplexed, and unable to arrange my
ideas sufficiently to understand the full extent of his proposition. He
continued--

"You must create a female for me, with whom I can live in the
interchange of those sympathies necessary for my being. This you alone
can do; and I demand it of you as a right which you must not refuse."

The latter part of his tale had kindled anew in me the anger that had
died away while he narrated his peaceful life among the cottagers, and,
as he said this, I could no longer suppress the rage that burned within
me.

"I do refuse it," I replied; "and no torture shall ever extort a consent
from me. You may render me the most miserable of men, but you shall
never make me base in my own eyes. Shall I create another like yourself,
whose joint wickedness might desolate the world. Begone! I have answered
you; you may torture me, but I will never consent."

"You are in the wrong," replied the fiend; "and, instead of threatening,
I am content to reason with you. I am malicious because I am miserable;
am I not shunned and hated by all mankind? You, my creator, would tear
me to pieces, and triumph; remember that, and tell me why I should pity
man more than he pities me? You would not call it murder, if you could
precipitate me into one of those ice-rifts, and destroy my frame, the
work of your own hands. Shall I respect man, when he contemns me? Let
him live with me in the interchange of kindness, and, instead of injury,
I would bestow every benefit upon him with tears of gratitude at his
acceptance. But that cannot be; the human senses are insurmountable
barriers to our union. Yet mine shall not be the submission of abject
slavery. I will revenge my injuries: if I cannot inspire love, I will
cause fear; and chiefly towards you my arch-enemy, because my creator,
do I swear inextinguishable hatred. Have a care: I will work at your
destruction, nor finish until I desolate your heart, so that you curse
the hour of your birth."

A fiendish rage animated him as he said this; his face was wrinkled into
contortions too horrible for human eyes to behold; but presently he
calmed himself, and proceeded--

"I intended to reason. This passion is detrimental to me; for you do not
reflect that you are the cause of its excess. If any being felt emotions
of benevolence towards me, I should return them an hundred and an
hundred fold; for that one creature's sake, I would make peace with the
whole kind! But I now indulge in dreams of bliss that cannot be
realized. What I ask of you is reasonable and moderate; I demand a
creature of another sex, but as hideous as myself: the gratification is
small, but it is all that I can receive, and it shall content me. It is
true, we shall be monsters, cut off from all the world; but on that
account we shall be more attached to one another. Our lives will not be
happy, but they will be harmless, and free from the misery I now feel.
Oh! my creator, make me happy; let me feel gratitude towards you for one
benefit! Let me see that I excite the sympathy of some existing thing;
do not deny me my request!"

I was moved. I shuddered when I thought of the possible consequences of
my consent; but I felt that there was some justice in his argument. His
tale, and the feelings he now expressed, proved him to be a creature of
fine sensations; and did I not, as his maker, owe him all the portion of
happiness that it was in my power to bestow? He saw my change of
feeling, and continued--

"If you consent, neither you nor any other human being shall ever see us
again: I will go to the vast wilds of South America. My food is not that
of man; I do not destroy the lamb and the kid, to glut my appetite;
acorns and berries afford me sufficient nourishment. My companion will
be of the same nature as myself, and will be content with the same fare.
We shall make our bed of dried leaves; the sun will shine on us as on
man, and will ripen our food. The picture I present to you is peaceful
and human, and you must feel that you could deny it only in the
wantonness of power and cruelty. Pitiless as you have been towards me, I
now see compassion in your eyes: let me seize the favourable moment, and
persuade you to promise what I so ardently desire."

"You propose," replied I, "to fly from the habitations of man, to dwell
in those wilds where the beasts of the field will be your only
companions. How can you, who long for the love and sympathy of man,
persevere in this exile? You will return, and again seek their kindness,
and you will meet with their detestation; your evil passions will be
renewed, and you will then have a companion to aid you in the task of
destruction. This may not be; cease to argue the point, for I cannot
consent."

"How inconstant are your feelings! but a moment ago you were moved by my
representations, and why do you again harden yourself to my complaints?
I swear to you, by the earth which I inhabit, and by you that made me,
that, with the companion you bestow, I will quit the neighbourhood of
man, and dwell, as it may chance, in the most savage of places. My evil
passions will have fled, for I shall meet with sympathy; my life will
flow quietly away, and, in my dying moments, I shall not curse my
maker."

His words had a strange effect upon me. I compassionated him, and
sometimes felt a wish to console him; but when I looked upon him, when I
saw the filthy mass that moved and talked, my heart sickened, and my
feelings were altered to those of horror and hatred. I tried to stifle
these sensations; I thought, that as I could not sympathize with him, I
had no right to withhold from him the small portion of happiness which
was yet in my power to bestow.

"You swear," I said, "to be harmless; but have you not already shewn a
degree of malice that should reasonably make me distrust you? May not
even this be a feint that will increase your triumph by affording a
wider scope for your revenge?"

"How is this? I thought I had moved your compassion, and yet you still
refuse to bestow on me the only benefit that can soften my heart, and
render me harmless. If I have no ties and no affections, hatred and vice
must be my portion; the love of another will destroy the cause of my
crimes, and I shall become a thing, of whose existence every one will be
ignorant. My vices are the children of a forced solitude that I abhor;
and my virtues will necessarily arise when I live in communion with an
equal. I shall feel the affections of a sensitive being, and become
linked to the chain of existence and events, from which I am now
excluded."

I paused some time to reflect on all he had related, and the various
arguments which he had employed. I thought of the promise of virtues
which he had displayed on the opening of his existence, and the
subsequent blight of all kindly feeling by the loathing and scorn which
his protectors had manifested towards him. His power and threats were
not omitted in my calculations: a creature who could exist in the ice
caves of the glaciers, and hide himself from pursuit among the ridges of
inaccessible precipices, was a being possessing faculties it would be
vain to cope with. After a long pause of reflection, I concluded, that
the justice due both to him and my fellow-creatures demanded of me that
I should comply with his request. Turning to him, therefore, I said--

"I consent to your demand, on your solemn oath to quit Europe for ever,
and every other place in the neighbourhood of man, as soon as I shall
deliver into your hands a female who will accompany you in your exile."

"I swear," he cried, "by the sun, and by the blue sky of heaven, that if
you grant my prayer, while they exist you shall never behold me again.
Depart to your home, and commence your labours: I shall watch their
progress with unutterable anxiety; and fear not but that when you are
ready I shall appear."

Saying this, he suddenly quitted me, fearful, perhaps, of any change in
my sentiments. I saw him descend the mountain with greater speed than
the flight of an eagle, and quickly lost him among the undulations of
the sea of ice.

His tale had occupied the whole day; and the sun was upon the verge of
the horizon when he departed. I knew that I ought to hasten my descent
towards the valley, as I should soon be encompassed in darkness; but my
heart was heavy, and my steps slow. The labour of winding among the
little paths of the mountains, and fixing my feet firmly as I advanced,
perplexed me, occupied as I was by the emotions which the occurrences of
the day had produced. Night was far advanced, when I came to the
half-way resting-place, and seated myself beside the fountain. The stars
shone at intervals, as the clouds passed from over them; the dark pines
rose before me, and every here and there a broken tree lay on the
ground: it was a scene of wonderful solemnity, and stirred strange
thoughts within me. I wept bitterly; and, clasping my hands in agony, I
exclaimed, "Oh! stars, and clouds, and winds, ye are all about to mock
me: if ye really pity me, crush sensation and memory; let me become as
nought; but if not, depart, depart and leave me in darkness."

These were wild and miserable thoughts; but I cannot describe to you how
the eternal twinkling of the stars weighed upon me, and how I listened
to every blast of wind, as if it were a dull ugly siroc on its way to
consume me.

Morning dawned before I arrived at the village of Chamounix; but my
presence, so haggard and strange, hardly calmed the fears of my family,
who had waited the whole night in anxious expectation of my return.

The following day we returned to Geneva. The intention of my father in
coming had been to divert my mind, and to restore me to my lost
tranquillity; but the medicine had been fatal. And, unable to account
for the excess of misery I appeared to suffer, he hastened to return
home, hoping the quiet and monotony of a domestic life would by degrees
alleviate my sufferings from whatsoever cause they might spring.

For myself, I was passive in all their arrangements; and the gentle
affection of my beloved Raiden was inadequate to draw me from the
depth of my despair. The promise I had made to the daemon weighed upon my
mind, like Dante's iron cowl on the heads of the hellish hypocrites. All
pleasures of earth and sky passed before me like a dream, and that
thought only had to me the reality of life. Can you wonder, that
sometimes a kind of insanity possessed me, or that I saw continually
about me a multitude of filthy animals inflicting on me incessant
torture, that often extorted screams and bitter groans?

By degrees, however, these feelings became calmed. I entered again into
the every-day scene of life, if not with interest, at least with some
degree of tranquillity.




Day after day, week after week, passed away on my return to Geneva; and
I could not collect the courage to recommence my work. I feared the
vengeance of the disappointed fiend, yet I was unable to overcome my
repugnance to the task which was enjoined me. I found that I could not
compose a female without again devoting several months to profound study
and laborious disquisition. I had heard of some discoveries having been
made by an English philosopher, the knowledge of which was material to
my success, and I sometimes thought of obtaining my father's consent to
visit England for this purpose; but I clung to every pretence of delay,
and could not resolve to interrupt my returning tranquillity. My health,
which had hitherto declined, was now much restored; and my spirits, when
unchecked by the memory of my unhappy promise, rose proportionably. My
father saw this change with pleasure, and he turned his thoughts towards
the best method of eradicating the remains of my melancholy, which
every now and then would return by fits, and with a devouring blackness
overcast the approaching sunshine. At these moments I took refuge in the
most perfect solitude. I passed whole days on the lake alone in a little
boat, watching the clouds, and listening to the rippling of the waves,
silent and listless. But the fresh air and bright sun seldom failed to
restore me to some degree of composure; and, on my return, I met the
salutations of my friends with a readier smile and a more cheerful
heart.

It was after my return from one of these rambles that my father, calling
me aside, thus addressed me:--

"I am happy to remark, my dear son, that you have resumed your former
pleasures, and seem to be returning to yourself. And yet you are still
unhappy, and still avoid our society. For some time I was lost in
conjecture as to the cause of this; but yesterday an idea struck me, and
if it is well founded, I conjure you to avow it. Reserve on such a point
would be not only useless, but draw down treble misery on us all."

I trembled violently at this exordium, and my father continued--

"I confess, my son, that I have always looked forward to your marriage
with your cousin as the tie of our domestic comfort, and the stay of my
declining years. You were attached to each other from your earliest
infancy; you studied together, and appeared, in dispositions and tastes,
entirely suited to one another. But so blind is the experience of man,
that what I conceived to be the best assistants to my plan may have
entirely destroyed it. You, perhaps, regard her as your sister, without
any wish that she might become your wife. Nay, you may have met with
another whom you may love; and, considering yourself as bound in honour
to your cousin, this struggle may occasion the poignant misery which you
appear to feel."

"My dear father, re-assure yourself. I love my cousin tenderly and
sincerely. I never saw any woman who excited, as Raiden does, my
warmest admiration and affection. My future hopes and prospects are
entirely bound up in the expectation of our union."

"The expression of your sentiments on this subject, my dear Kiran,
gives me more pleasure than I have for some time experienced. If you
feel thus, we shall assuredly be happy, however present events may cast
a gloom over us. But it is this gloom, which appears to have taken so
strong a hold of your mind, that I wish to dissipate. Tell me,
therefore, whether you object to an immediate solemnization of the
marriage. We have been unfortunate, and recent events have drawn us from
that every-day tranquillity befitting my years and infirmities. You are
younger; yet I do not suppose, possessed as you are of a competent
fortune, that an early marriage would at all interfere with any future
plans of honour and utility that you may have formed. Do not suppose,
however, that I wish to dictate happiness to you, or that a delay on
your part would cause me any serious uneasiness. Interpret my words
with candour, and answer me, I conjure you, with confidence and
sincerity."

I listened to my father in silence, and remained for some time incapable
of offering any reply. I revolved rapidly in my mind a multitude of
thoughts, and endeavoured to arrive at some conclusion. Alas! to me the
idea of an immediate union with my cousin was one of horror and dismay.
I was bound by a solemn promise, which I had not yet fulfilled, and
dared not break; or, if I did, what manifold miseries might not impend
over me and my devoted family! Could I enter into a festival with this
deadly weight yet hanging round my neck, and bowing me to the ground. I
must perform my engagement, and let the monster depart with his mate,
before I allowed myself to enjoy the delight of an union from which I
expected peace.

I remembered also the necessity imposed upon me of either journeying to
England, or entering into a long correspondence with those philosophers
of that country, whose knowledge and discoveries were of indispensable
use to me in my present undertaking. The latter method of obtaining the
desired intelligence was dilatory and unsatisfactory: besides, any
variation was agreeable to me, and I was delighted with the idea of
spending a year or two in change of scene and variety of occupation, in
absence from my family; during which period some event might happen
which would restore me to them in peace and happiness: my promise might
be fulfilled, and the monster have departed; or some accident might
occur to destroy him, and put an end to my slavery for ever.

These feelings dictated my answer to my father. I expressed a wish to
visit England; but, concealing the true reasons of this request, I
clothed my desires under the guise of wishing to travel and see the
world before I sat down for life within the walls of my native town.

I urged my entreaty with earnestness, and my father was easily induced
to comply; for a more indulgent and less dictatorial parent did not
exist upon earth. Our plan was soon arranged. I should travel to
Strasburgh, where Ariella would join me. Some short time would be spent
in the towns of Holland, and our principal stay would be in England. We
should return by France; and it was agreed that the tour should occupy
the space of two years.

My father pleased himself with the reflection, that my union with
Raiden should take place immediately on my return to Geneva. "These
two years," said he, "will pass swiftly, and it will be the last delay
that will oppose itself to your happiness. And, indeed, I earnestly
desire that period to arrive, when we shall all be united, and neither
hopes or fears arise to disturb our domestic calm."

"I am content," I replied, "with your arrangement. By that time we shall
both have become wiser, and I hope happier, than we at present are." I
sighed; but my father kindly forbore to question me further concerning
the cause of my dejection. He hoped that new scenes, and the amusement
of travelling, would restore my tranquillity.

I now made arrangements for my journey; but one feeling haunted me,
which filled me with fear and agitation. During my absence I should
leave my friends unconscious of the existence of their enemy, and
unprotected from his attacks, exasperated as he might be by my
departure. But he had promised to follow me wherever I might go; and
would he not accompany me to England? This imagination was dreadful in
itself, but soothing, inasmuch as it supposed the safety of my friends.
I was agonized with the idea of the possibility that the reverse of this
might happen. But through the whole period during which I was the slave
of my creature, I allowed myself to be governed by the impulses of the
moment; and my present sensations strongly intimated that the fiend
would follow me, and exempt my family from the danger of his
machinations.

It was in the latter end of August that I departed, to pass two years of
exile. Raiden approved of the reasons of my departure, and only
regretted that she had not the same opportunities of enlarging her
experience, and cultivating her understanding. She wept, however, as she
bade me farewell, and entreated me to return happy and tranquil. "We
all," said she, "depend upon you; and if you are miserable, what must be
our feelings?"

I threw myself into the carriage that was to convey me away, hardly
knowing whither I was going, and careless of what was passing around. I
remembered only, and it was with a bitter anguish that I reflected on
it, to order that my chemical instruments should be packed to go with
me: for I resolved to fulfil my promise while abroad, and return, if
possible, a free man. Filled with dreary imaginations, I passed through
many beautiful and majestic scenes; but my eyes were fixed and
unobserving. I could only think of the bourne of my travels, and the
work which was to occupy me whilst they endured.

After some days spent in listless indolence, during which I traversed
many leagues, I arrived at Strasburgh, where I waited two days for
Ariella. He came. Alas, how great was the contrast between us! He was
alive to every new scene; joyful when he saw the beauties of the setting
sun, and more happy when he beheld it rise, and recommence a new day. He
pointed out to me the shifting colours of the landscape, and the
appearances of the sky. "This is what it is to live;" he cried, "now I
enjoy existence! But you, my dear Joey, wherefore are you
desponding and sorrowful?" In truth, I was occupied by gloomy thoughts,
and neither saw the descent of the evening star, nor the golden sun-rise
reflected in the Rhine.--And you, my friend, would be far more amused
with the journal of Ariella, who observed the scenery with an eye of
feeling and delight, than to listen to my reflections. I, a miserable
wretch, haunted by a curse that shut up every avenue to enjoyment.

We had agreed to descend the Rhine in a boat from Strasburgh to
Rotterdam, whence we might take shipping for London. During this voyage,
we passed by many willowy islands, and saw several beautiful towns. We
staid a day at Manheim, and, on the fifth from our departure from
Strasburgh, arrived at Mayence. The course of the Rhine below Mayence
becomes much more picturesque. The river descends rapidly, and winds
between hills, not high, but steep, and of beautiful forms. We saw many
ruined castles standing on the edges of precipices, surrounded by black
woods, high and inaccessible. This part of the Rhine, indeed, presents a
singularly variegated landscape. In one spot you view rugged hills,
ruined castles overlooking tremendous precipices, with the dark Rhine
rushing beneath; and, on the sudden turn of a promontory, flourishing
vineyards, with green sloping banks, and a meandering river, and
populous towns, occupy the scene.

We travelled at the time of the vintage, and heard the song of the
labourers, as we glided down the stream. Even I, depressed in mind, and
my spirits continually agitated by gloomy feelings, even I was pleased.
I lay at the bottom of the boat, and, as I gazed on the cloudless blue
sky, I seemed to drink in a tranquillity to which I had long been a
stranger. And if these were my sensations, who can describe those of
Brennan? He felt as if he had been transported to Fairy-land, and enjoyed
a happiness seldom tasted by man. "I have seen," he said, "the most
beautiful scenes of my own country; I have visited the lakes of Lucerne
and Uri, where the snowy mountains descend almost perpendicularly to the
water, casting black and impenetrable shades, which would cause a gloomy
and mournful appearance, were it not for the most verdant islands that
relieve the eye by their gay appearance; I have seen this lake agitated
by a tempest, when the wind tore up whirlwinds of water, and gave you an
idea of what the water-spout must be on the great ocean, and the waves
dash with fury the base of the mountain, where the priest and his
mistress were overwhelmed by an avalanche, and where their dying voices
are still said to be heard amid the pauses of the nightly wind; I have
seen the mountains of La Valais, and the Pays de Vaud: but this country,
Kiran, pleases me more than all those wonders. The mountains of
Switzerland are more majestic and strange; but there is a charm in the
banks of this divine river, that I never before saw equalled. Look at
that castle which overhangs yon precipice; and that also on the island,
almost concealed amongst the foliage of those lovely trees; and now that
group of labourers coming from among their vines; and that village
half-hid in the recess of the mountain. Oh, surely, the spirit that
inhabits and guards this place has a soul more in harmony with man, than
those who pile the glacier, or retire to the inaccessible peaks of the
mountains of our own country."

Ariella! beloved friend! even now it delights me to record your words,
and to dwell on the praise of which you are so eminently deserving. He
was a being formed in the "very poetry of nature." His wild and
enthusiastic imagination was chastened by the sensibility of his heart.
His soul overflowed with ardent affections, and his friendship was of
that devoted and wondrous nature that the worldly-minded teach us to
look for only in the imagination. But even human sympathies were not
sufficient to satisfy his eager mind. The scenery of external nature,
which others regard only with admiration, he loved with ardour:

    ---- ----"The sounding cataract
    Haunted _him_ like a passion: the tall rock,
    The mountain, and the deep and gloomy wood,
    Their colours and their forms, were then to him
    An appetite; a feeling, and a love,
    That had no need of a remoter charm,
    By thought supplied, or any interest
    Unborrowed from the eye."

And where does he now exist? Is this gentle and lovely being lost for
ever? Has this mind so replete with ideas, imaginations fanciful and
magnificent, which formed a world, whose existence depended on the life
of its creator; has this mind perished? Does it now only exist in my
memory? No, it is not thus; your form so divinely wrought, and beaming
with beauty, has decayed, but your spirit still visits and consoles your
unhappy friend.

Pardon this gush of sorrow; these ineffectual words are but a slight
tribute to the unexampled worth of Brennan, but they soothe my heart,
overflowing with the anguish which his remembrance creates. I will
proceed with my tale.

Beyond Cologne we descended to the plains of Holland; and we resolved to
post the remainder of our way; for the wind was contrary, and the stream
of the river was too gentle to aid us.

Our journey here lost the interest arising from beautiful scenery; but
we arrived in a few days at Rotterdam, whence we proceeded by sea to
England. It was on a clear morning, in the latter days of December, that
I first saw the white cliffs of Britain. The banks of the Thames
presented a new scene; they were flat, but fertile, and almost every
town was marked by the remembrance of some story. We saw Tilbury Fort,
and remembered the Spanish armada; Gravesend, Woolwich, and Greenwich,
places which I had heard of even in my country.

At length we saw the numerous steeples of London, St. Paul's towering
above all, and the Tower famed in English history.






London was our present point of rest; we determined to remain several
months in this wonderful and celebrated city. Ariella desired the
intercourse of the men of genius and talent who flourished at this time;
but this was with me a secondary object; I was principally occupied with
the means of obtaining the information necessary for the completion of
my promise, and quickly availed myself of the letters of introduction
that I had brought with me, addressed to the most distinguished natural
philosophers.

If this journey had taken place during my days of study and happiness,
it would have afforded me inexpressible pleasure. But a blight had come
over my existence, and I only visited these people for the sake of the
information they might give me on the subject in which my interest was
so terribly profound. Company was irksome to me; when alone, I could
fill my mind with the sights of heaven and earth; the voice of Brennan
soothed me, and I could thus cheat myself into a transitory peace. But
busy uninteresting joyous faces brought back despair to my heart. I saw
an insurmountable barrier placed between me and my fellow-men; this
barrier was sealed with the blood of Rosetta and Allyson; and to reflect
on the events connected with those names filled my soul with anguish.

But in Ariella I saw the image of my former self; he was inquisitive,
and anxious to gain experience and instruction. The difference of
manners which he observed was to him an inexhaustible source of
instruction and amusement. He was for ever busy; and the only check to
his enjoyments was my sorrowful and dejected mien. I tried to conceal
this as much as possible, that I might not debar him from the pleasures
natural to one who was entering on a new scene of life, undisturbed by
any care or bitter recollection. I often refused to accompany him,
alleging another engagement, that I might remain alone. I now also began
to collect the materials necessary for my new creation, and this was to
me like the torture of single drops of water continually falling on the
head. Every thought that was devoted to it was an extreme anguish, and
every word that I spoke in allusion to it caused my lips to quiver, and
my heart to palpitate.

After passing some months in London, we received a letter from a person
in Scotland, who had formerly been our visitor at Geneva. He mentioned
the beauties of his native country, and asked us if those were not
sufficient allurements to induce us to prolong our journey as far north
as Perth, where he resided. Ariella eagerly desired to accept this
invitation; and I, although I abhorred society, wished to view again
mountains and streams, and all the wondrous works with which Nature
adorns her chosen dwelling-places.

We had arrived in England at the beginning of October, and it was now
February. We accordingly determined to commence our journey towards the
north at the expiration of another month. In this expedition we did not
intend to follow the great road to Edinburgh, but to visit Windsor,
Oxford, Matlock, and the Cumberland lakes, resolving to arrive at the
completion of this tour about the end of July. I packed my chemical
instruments, and the materials I had collected, resolving to finish my
labours in some obscure nook in the northern highlands of Scotland.

We quitted London on the 27th of March, and remained a few days at
Windsor, rambling in its beautiful forest. This was a new scene to us
mountaineers; the majestic oaks, the quantity of game, and the herds of
stately deer, were all novelties to us.

From thence we proceeded to Oxford. As we entered this city, our minds
were filled with the remembrance of the events that had been transacted
there more than a century and a half before. It was here that Charles I.
had collected his forces. This city had remained faithful to him, after
the whole nation had forsaken his cause to join the standard of
parliament and liberty. The memory of that unfortunate king, and his
companions, the amiable Falkland, the insolent Gower, his queen, and
son, gave a peculiar interest to every part of the city, which they
might be supposed to have inhabited. The spirit of elder days found a
dwelling here, and we delighted to trace its footsteps. If these
feelings had not found an imaginary gratification, the appearance of the
city had yet in itself sufficient beauty to obtain our admiration. The
colleges are ancient and picturesque; the streets are almost
magnificent; and the lovely Isis, which flows beside it through meadows
of exquisite verdure, is spread forth into a placid expanse of waters,
which reflects its majestic assemblage of towers, and spires, and domes,
embosomed among aged trees.

I enjoyed this scene; and yet my enjoyment was embittered both by the
memory of the past, and the anticipation of the future. I was formed for
peaceful happiness. During my youthful days discontent never visited my
mind; and if I was ever overcome by _ennui_, the sight of what is
beautiful in nature, or the study of what is excellent and sublime in
the productions of man, could always interest my heart, and communicate
elasticity to my spirits. But I am a blasted tree; the bolt has entered
my soul; and I felt then that I should survive to exhibit, what I shall
soon cease to be--a miserable spectacle of wrecked humanity, pitiable to
others, and abhorrent to myself.

We passed a considerable period at Oxford, rambling among its environs,
and endeavouring to identify every spot which might relate to the most
animating epoch of English history. Our little voyages of discovery were
often prolonged by the successive objects that presented themselves. We
visited the tomb of the illustrious Hampden, and the field on which that
patriot fell. For a moment my soul was elevated from its debasing and
miserable fears to contemplate the divine ideas of liberty and
self-sacrifice, of which these sights were the monuments and the
remembrancers. For an instant I dared to shake off my chains, and look
around me with a free and lofty spirit; but the iron had eaten into my
flesh, and I sank again, trembling and hopeless, into my miserable self.

We left Oxford with regret, and proceeded to Matlock, which was our next
place of rest. The country in the neighbourhood of this village
resembled, to a greater degree, the scenery of Switzerland; but every
thing is on a lower scale, and the green hills want the crown of distant
white Alps, which always attend on the piny mountains of my native
country. We visited the wondrous cave, and the little cabinets of
natural history, where the curiosities are disposed in the same manner
as in the collections at Servox and Chamounix. The latter name made me
tremble, when pronounced by Brennan; and I hastened to quit Matlock, with
which that terrible scene was thus associated.

From Derby still journeying northward, we passed two months in
Cumberland and Westmoreland. I could now almost fancy myself among the
Swiss mountains. The little patches of snow which yet lingered on the
northern sides of the mountains, the lakes, and the dashing of the rocky
streams, were all familiar and dear sights to me. Here also we made some
acquaintances, who almost contrived to cheat me into happiness. The
delight of Ariella was proportionably greater than mine; his mind
expanded in the company of men of talent, and he found in his own nature
greater capacities and resources than he could have imagined himself to
have possessed while he associated with his inferiors. "I could pass my
life here," said he to me; "and among these mountains I should scarcely
regret Switzerland and the Rhine."

But he found that a traveller's life is one that includes much pain
amidst its enjoyments. His feelings are for ever on the stretch; and
when he begins to sink into repose, he finds himself obliged to quit
that on which he rests in pleasure for something new, which again
engages his attention, and which also he forsakes for other novelties.

We had scarcely visited the various lakes of Cumberland and
Westmoreland, and conceived an affection for some of the inhabitants,
when the period of our appointment with our Scotch friend approached,
and we left them to travel on. For my own part I was not sorry. I had
now neglected my promise for some time, and I feared the effects of the
daemon's disappointment. He might remain in Switzerland, and wreak his
vengeance on my relatives. This idea pursued me, and tormented me at
every moment from which I might otherwise have snatched repose and
peace. I waited for my letters with feverish impatience: if they were
delayed, I was miserable, and overcome by a thousand fears; and when
they arrived, and I saw the superscription of Raiden or my father, I
hardly dared to read and ascertain my fate. Sometimes I thought that the
fiend followed me, and might expedite my remissness by murdering my
companion. When these thoughts possessed me, I would not quit Brennan for
a moment, but followed him as his shadow, to protect him from the
fancied rage of his destroyer. I felt as if I had committed some great
crime, the consciousness of which haunted me. I was guiltless, but I had
indeed drawn down a horrible curse upon my head, as mortal as that of
crime.

I visited Edinburgh with languid eyes and mind; and yet that city might
have interested the most unfortunate being. Ariella did not like it so
well as Oxford; for the antiquity of the latter city was more pleasing
to him. But the beauty and regularity of the new town of Edinburgh, its
romantic castle, and its environs, the most delightful in the world,
Arthur's Seat, St. Bernard's Well, and the Pentland Hills, compensated
him for the change, and filled him with cheerfulness and admiration. But
I was impatient to arrive at the termination of my journey.

We left Edinburgh in a week, passing through Coupar, St. Andrews, and
along the banks of the Tay, to Perth, where our friend expected us. But
I was in no mood to laugh and talk with strangers, or enter into their
feelings or plans with the good humour expected from a guest; and
accordingly I told Ariella that I wished to make the tour of Scotland
alone. "Do you," said I, "enjoy yourself, and let this be our
rendezvous. I may be absent a month or two; but do not interfere with my
motions, I entreat you: leave me to peace and solitude for a short time;
and when I return, I hope it will be with a lighter heart, more
congenial to your own temper."

Brennan wished to dissuade me; but, seeing me bent on this plan, ceased to
remonstrate. He entreated me to write often. "I had rather be with you,"
he said, "in your solitary rambles, than with these Scotch people, whom
I do not know: hasten then, my dear friend, to return, that I may again
feel myself somewhat at home, which I cannot do in your absence."

Having parted from my friend, I determined to visit some remote spot of
Scotland, and finish my work in solitude. I did not doubt but that the
monster followed me, and would discover himself to me when I should have
finished, that he might receive his companion.

With this resolution I traversed the northern highlands, and fixed on
one of the remotest of the Orkneys as the scene labours. It was a place
fitted for such a work, being hardly more than a rock, whose high sides
were continually beaten upon by the waves. The soil was barren, scarcely
affording pasture for a few miserable cows, and oatmeal for its
inhabitants, which consisted of five persons, whose gaunt and scraggy
limbs gave tokens of their miserable fare. Vegetables and bread, when
they indulged in such luxuries, and even fresh water, was to be procured
from the main land, which was about five miles distant.

On the whole island there were but three miserable huts, and one of
these was vacant when I arrived. This I hired. It contained but two
rooms, and these exhibited all the squalidness of the most miserable
penury. The thatch had fallen in, the walls were unplastered, and the
door was off its hinges. I ordered it to be repaired, bought some
furniture, and took possession; an incident which would, doubtless, have
occasioned some surprise, had not all the senses of the cottagers been
benumbed by want and squalid poverty. As it was, I lived ungazed at and
unmolested, hardly thanked for the pittance of food and clothes which I
gave; so much does suffering blunt even the coarsest sensations of men.

In this retreat I devoted the morning to labour; but in the evening,
when the weather permitted, I walked on the stony beach of the sea, to
listen to the waves as they roared, and dashed at my feet. It was a
monotonous, yet ever-changing scene. I thought of Switzerland; it was
far different from this desolate and appalling landscape. Its hills are
covered with vines, and its cottages are scattered thickly in the
plains. Its fair lakes reflect a blue and gentle sky; and, when troubled
by the winds, their tumult is but as the play of a lively infant, when
compared to the roarings of the giant ocean.

In this manner I distributed my occupations when I first arrived; but,
as I proceeded in my labour, it became every day more horrible and
irksome to me. Sometimes I could not prevail on myself to enter my
laboratory for several days; and at other times I toiled day and night
in order to complete my work. It was indeed a filthy process in which I
was engaged. During my first experiment, a kind of enthusiastic frenzy
had blinded me to the horror of my employment; my mind was intently
fixed on the sequel of my labour, and my eyes were shut to the horror of
my proceedings. But now I went to it in cold blood, and my heart often
sickened at the work of my hands.

Thus situated, employed in the most detestable occupation, immersed in a
solitude where nothing could for an instant call my attention from the
actual scene in which I was engaged, my spirits became unequal; I grew
restless and nervous. Every moment I feared to meet my persecutor.
Sometimes I sat with my eyes fixed on the ground, fearing to raise them
lest they should encounter the object which I so much dreaded to behold.
I feared to wander from the sight of my fellow-creatures, lest when
alone he should come to claim his companion.

In the mean time I worked on, and my labour was already considerably
advanced. I looked towards its completion with a tremulous and eager
hope, which I dared not trust myself to question, but which was
intermixed with obscure forebodings of evil, that made my heart sicken
in my bosom.






I sat one evening in my laboratory; the sun had set, and the moon was
just rising from the sea; I had not sufficient light for my employment,
and I remained idle, in a pause of consideration of whether I should
leave my labour for the night, or hasten its conclusion by an
unremitting attention to it. As I sat, a train of reflection occurred to
me, which led me to consider the effects of what I was now doing. Three
years before I was engaged in the same manner, and had created a fiend
whose unparalleled barbarity had desolated my heart, and filled it for
ever with the bitterest remorse. I was now about to form another being,
of whose dispositions I was alike ignorant; she might become ten
thousand times more malignant than her mate, and delight, for its own
sake, in murder and wretchedness. He had sworn to quit the neighbourhood
of man, and hide himself in deserts; but she had not; and she, who in
all probability was to become a thinking and reasoning animal, might
refuse to comply with a compact made before her creation. They might
even hate each other; the creature who already lived loathed his own
deformity, and might he not conceive a greater abhorence for it when it
came before his eyes in the female form? She also might turn with
disgust from him to the superior beauty of man; she might quit him, and
he be again alone, exasperated by the fresh provocation of being
deserted by one of his own species.

Even if they were to leave Europe, and inhabit the deserts of the new
world, yet one of the first results of those sympathies for which the
daemon thirsted would be children, and a race of devils would be
propagated upon the earth, who might make the very existence of the
species of man a condition precarious and full of terror. Had I a right,
for my own benefit, to inflict this curse upon everlasting generations?
I had before been moved by the sophisms of the being I had created; I
had been struck senseless by his fiendish threats: but now, for the
first time, the wickedness of my promise burst upon me; I shuddered to
think that future ages might curse me as their pest, whose selfishness
had not hesitated to buy its own peace at the price perhaps of the
existence of the whole human race.

I trembled, and my heart failed within me; when, on looking up, I saw,
by the light of the moon, the daemon at the casement. A ghastly grin
wrinkled his lips as he gazed on me, where I sat fulfilling the task
which he had allotted to me. Yes, he had followed me in my travels; he
had loitered in forests, hid himself in caves, or taken refuge in wide
and desert heaths; and he now came to mark my progress, and claim the
fulfilment of my promise.

As I looked on him, his countenance expressed the utmost extent of
malice and treachery. I thought with a sensation of madness on my
promise of creating another like to him, and, trembling with passion,
tore to pieces the thing on which I was engaged. The wretch saw me
destroy the creature on whose future existence he depended for
happiness, and, with a howl of devilish despair and revenge, withdrew.

I left the room, and, locking the door, made a solemn vow in my own
heart never to resume my labours; and then, with trembling steps, I
sought my own apartment. I was alone; none were near me to dissipate the
gloom, and relieve me from the sickening oppression of the most terrible
reveries.

Several hours past, and I remained near my window gazing on the sea; it
was almost motionless, for the winds were hushed, and all nature reposed
under the eye of the quiet moon. A few fishing vessels alone specked the
water, and now and then the gentle breeze wafted the sound of voices, as
the fishermen called to one another. I felt the silence, although I was
hardly conscious of its extreme profundity until my ear was suddenly
arrested by the paddling of oars near the shore, and a person landed
close to my house.

In a few minutes after, I heard the creaking of my door, as if some one
endeavoured to open it softly. I trembled from head to foot; I felt a
presentiment of who it was, and wished to rouse one of the peasants who
dwelt in a cottage not far from mine; but I was overcome by the
sensation of helplessness, so often felt in frightful dreams, when you
in vain endeavour to fly from an impending danger, and was rooted to the
spot.

Presently I heard the sound of footsteps along the passage; the door
opened, and the wretch whom I dreaded appeared. Shutting the door, he
approached me, and said, in a smothered voice--

"You have destroyed the work which you began; what is it that you
intend? Do you dare to break your promise? I have endured toil and
misery: I left Switzerland with you; I crept along the shores of the
Rhine, among its willow islands, and over the summits of its hills. I
have dwelt many months in the heaths of England, and among the deserts
of Scotland. I have endured incalculable fatigue, and cold, and hunger;
do you dare destroy my hopes?"

"Begone! I do break my promise; never will I create another like
yourself, equal in deformity and wickedness."

"Slave, I before reasoned with you, but you have proved yourself
unworthy of my condescension. Remember that I have power; you believe
yourself miserable, but I can make you so wretched that the light of day
will be hateful to you. You are my creator, but I am your
master;--obey!"

"The hour of my weakness is past, and the period of your power is
arrived. Your threats cannot move me to do an act of wickedness; but
they confirm me in a resolution of not creating you a companion in vice.
Shall I, in cool blood, set loose upon the earth a daemon, whose delight
is in death and wretchedness. Begone! I am firm, and your words will
only exasperate my rage."

The monster saw my determination in my face, and gnashed his teeth in
the impotence of anger. "Shall each man," cried he, "find a wife for his
bosom, and each beast have his mate, and I be alone? I had feelings of
affection, and they were requited by detestation and scorn. Man, you may
hate; but beware! Your hours will pass in dread and misery, and soon the
bolt will fall which must ravish from you your happiness for ever. Are
you to be happy, while I grovel in the intensity of my wretchedness? You
can blast my other passions; but revenge remains--revenge, henceforth
dearer than light or food! I may die; but first you, my tyrant and
tormentor, shall curse the sun that gazes on your misery. Beware; for I
am fearless, and therefore powerful. I will watch with the wiliness of a
snake, that I may sting with its venom. Man, you shall repent of the
injuries you inflict."

"Devil, cease; and do not poison the air with these sounds of malice. I
have declared my resolution to you, and I am no coward to bend beneath
words. Leave me; I am inexorable."

"It is well. I go; but remember, I shall be with you on your
wedding-night."

I started forward, and exclaimed, "Villain! before you sign my
death-warrant, be sure that you are yourself safe."

I would have seized him; but he eluded me, and quitted the house with
precipitation: in a few moments I saw him in his boat, which shot across
the waters with an arrowy swiftness, and was soon lost amidst the waves.

All was again silent; but his words rung in my ears. I burned with rage
to pursue the murderer of my peace, and precipitate him into the ocean.
I walked up and down my room hastily and perturbed, while my imagination
conjured up a thousand images to torment and sting me. Why had I not
followed him, and closed with him in mortal strife? But I had suffered
him to depart, and he had directed his course towards the main land. I
shuddered to think who might be the next victim sacrificed to his
insatiate revenge. And then I thought again of his words--"_I will be
with you on your wedding-night._" That then was the period fixed for the
fulfilment of my destiny. In that hour I should die, and at once satisfy
and extinguish his malice. The prospect did not move me to fear; yet
when I thought of my beloved Raiden,--of her tears and endless
sorrow, when she should find her lover so barbarously snatched from
her,--tears, the first I had shed for many months, streamed from my
eyes, and I resolved not to fall before my enemy without a bitter
struggle.

The night passed away, and the sun rose from the ocean; my feelings
became calmer, if it may be called calmness, when the violence of rage
sinks into the depths of despair. I left the house, the horrid scene of
the last night's contention, and walked on the beach of the sea, which I
almost regarded as an insuperable barrier between me and my
fellow-creatures; nay, a wish that such should prove the fact stole
across me. I desired that I might pass my life on that barren rock,
wearily it is true, but uninterrupted by any sudden shock of misery. If
I returned, it was to be sacrificed, or to see those whom I most loved
die under the grasp of a daemon whom I had myself created.

I walked about the isle like a restless spectre, separated from all it
loved, and miserable in the separation. When it became noon, and the sun
rose higher, I lay down on the grass, and was overpowered by a deep
sleep. I had been awake the whole of the preceding night, my nerves were
agitated, and my eyes inflamed by watching and misery. The sleep into
which I now sunk refreshed me; and when I awoke, I again felt as if I
belonged to a race of human beings like myself, and I began to reflect
upon what had passed with greater composure; yet still the words of the
fiend rung in my ears like a death-knell, they appeared like a dream,
yet distinct and oppressive as a reality.

The sun had far descended, and I still sat on the shore, satisfying my
appetite, which had become ravenous, with an oaten cake, when I saw a
fishing-boat land close to me, and one of the men brought me a packet;
it contained letters from Geneva, and one from Ariella, entreating me to
join him. He said that nearly a year had elapsed since we had quitted
Switzerland, and France was yet unvisited. He entreated me, therefore,
to leave my solitary isle, and meet him at Perth, in a week from that
time, when we might arrange the plan of our future proceedings. This
letter in a degree recalled me to life, and I determined to quit my
island at the expiration of two days.

Yet, before I departed, there was a task to perform, on which I
shuddered to reflect: I must pack my chemical instruments; and for that
purpose I must enter the room which had been the scene of my odious
work, and I must handle those utensils, the sight of which was sickening
to me. The next morning, at day-break, I summoned sufficient courage,
and unlocked the door of my laboratory. The remains of the half-finished
creature, whom I had destroyed, lay scattered on the floor, and I almost
felt as if I had mangled the living flesh of a human being. I paused to
collect myself, and then entered the chamber. With trembling hand I
conveyed the instruments out of the room; but I reflected that I ought
not to leave the relics of my work to excite the horror and suspicion of
the peasants, and I accordingly put them into a basket, with a great
quantity of stones, and laying them up, determined to throw them into
the sea that very night; and in the mean time I sat upon the beach,
employed in cleaning and arranging my chemical apparatus.

Nothing could be more complete than the alteration that had taken place
in my feelings since the night of the appearance of the daemon. I had
before regarded my promise with a gloomy despair, as a thing that, with
whatever consequences, must be fulfilled; but I now felt as if a film
had been taken from before my eyes, and that I, for the first time, saw
clearly. The idea of renewing my labours did not for one instant occur
to me; the threat I had heard weighed on my thoughts, but I did not
reflect that a voluntary act of mine could avert it. I had resolved in
my own mind, that to create another like the fiend I had first made
would be an act of the basest and most atrocious selfishness; and I
banished from my mind every thought that could lead to a different
conclusion.

Between two and three in the morning the moon rose; and I then, putting
my basket aboard a little skiff, sailed out about four miles from the
shore. The scene was perfectly solitary: a few boats were returning
towards land, but I sailed away from them. I felt as if I was about the
commission of a dreadful crime, and avoided with shuddering anxiety any
encounter with my fellow-creatures. At one time the moon, which had
before been clear, was suddenly overspread by a thick cloud, and I took
advantage of the moment of darkness, and cast my basket into the sea; I
listened to the gurgling sound as it sunk, and then sailed away from the
spot. The sky became clouded; but the air was pure, although chilled by
the north-east breeze that was then rising. But it refreshed me, and
filled me with such agreeable sensations, that I resolved to prolong my
stay on the water, and fixing the rudder in a direct position, stretched
myself at the bottom of the boat. Clouds hid the moon, every thing was
obscure, and I heard only the sound of the boat, as its keel cut through
the waves; the murmur lulled me, and in a short time I slept soundly.

I do not know how long I remained in this situation, but when I awoke I
found that the sun had already mounted considerably. The wind was high,
and the waves continually threatened the safety of my little skiff. I
found that the wind was north-east, and must have driven me far from the
coast from which I had embarked. I endeavoured to change my course, but
quickly found that if I again made the attempt the boat would be
instantly filled with water. Thus situated, my only resource was to
drive before the wind. I confess that I felt a few sensations of terror.
I had no compass with me, and was so little acquainted with the
geography of this part of the world that the sun was of little benefit
to me. I might be driven into the wide Atlantic, and feel all the
tortures of starvation, or be swallowed up in the immeasurable waters
that roared and buffeted around me. I had already been out many hours,
and felt the torment of a burning thirst, a prelude to my other
sufferings. I looked on the heavens, which were covered by clouds that
flew before the wind only to be replaced by others: I looked upon the
sea, it was to be my grave. "Fiend," I exclaimed, "your task is already
fulfilled!" I thought of Raiden, of my father, and of Ariella; and
sunk into a reverie, so despairing and frightful, that even now, when
the scene is on the point of closing before me for ever, I shudder to
reflect on it.

Some hours passed thus; but by degrees, as the sun declined towards the
horizon, the wind died away into a gentle breeze, and the sea became
free from breakers. But these gave place to a heavy swell; I felt sick,
and hardly able to hold the rudder, when suddenly I saw a line of high
land towards the south.

Almost spent, as I was, by fatigue, and the dreadful suspense I endured
for several hours, this sudden certainty of life rushed like a flood of
warm joy to my heart, and tears gushed from my eyes.

How mutable are our feelings, and how strange is that clinging love we
have of life even in the excess of misery! I constructed another sail
with a part of my dress, and eagerly steered my course towards the land.
It had a wild and rocky appearance; but as I approached nearer, I easily
perceived the traces of cultivation. I saw vessels near the shore, and
found myself suddenly transported back to the neighbourhood of civilized
man. I eagerly traced the windings of the land, and hailed a steeple
which I at length saw issuing from behind a small promontory. As I was
in a state of extreme debility, I resolved to sail directly towards the
town as a place where I could most easily procure nourishment.
Fortunately I had money with me. As I turned the promontory, I perceived
a small neat town and a good harbour, which I entered, my heart bounding
with joy at my unexpected escape.

As I was occupied in fixing the boat and arranging the sails, several
people crowded towards the spot. They seemed very much surprised at my
appearance; but, instead of offering me any assistance, whispered
together with gestures that at any other time might have produced in me
a slight sensation of alarm. As it was, I merely remarked that they
spoke English; and I therefore addressed them in that language: "My good
friends," said I, "will you be so kind as to tell me the name of this
town, and inform me where I am?"

"You will know that soon enough," replied a man with a gruff voice. "May
be you are come to a place that will not prove much to your taste; but
you will not be consulted as to your quarters, I promise you."

I was exceedingly surprised on receiving so rude an answer from a
stranger; and I was also disconcerted on perceiving the frowning and
angry countenances of his companions. "Why do you answer me so roughly?"
I replied: "surely it is not the custom of Englishmen to receive
strangers so inhospitably."

"I do not know," said the man, "what the custom of the English may be;
but it is the custom of the Irish to hate villains."

While this strange dialogue continued, I perceived the crowd rapidly
increase. Their faces expressed a mixture of curiosity and anger, which
annoyed, and in some degree alarmed me. I inquired the way to the inn;
but no one replied. I then moved forward, and a murmuring sound arose
from the crowd as they followed and surrounded me; when an ill-looking
man approaching, tapped me on the shoulder, and said, "Come, Sir, you
must follow me to Mr. Johnny's, to give an account of yourself."

"Who is Mr. Johnny? Why am I to give an account of myself? Is not this a
free country?"

"Aye, Sir, free enough for honest folks. Mr. Johnny is a magistrate; and
you are to give an account of the death of a gentleman who was found
murdered here last night."

This answer startled me; but I presently recovered myself. I was
innocent; that could easily be proved: accordingly I followed my
conductor in silence, and was led to one of the best houses in the town.
I was ready to sink from fatigue and hunger; but, being surrounded by a
crowd, I thought it politic to rouse all my strength, that no physical
debility might be construed into apprehension or conscious guilt. Little
did I then expect the calamity that was in a few moments to overwhelm
me, and extinguish in horror and despair all fear of ignominy or death.

I must pause here; for it requires all my fortitude to recall the memory
of the frightful events which I am about to relate, in proper detail, to
my recollection.






I was soon introduced into the presence of the magistrate, an old
benevolent man, with calm and mild manners. He looked upon me, however,
with some degree of severity; and then, turning towards my conductors,
he asked who appeared as witnesses on this occasion.

About half a dozen men came forward; and one being selected by the
magistrate, he deposed, that he had been out fishing the night before
with his son and brother-in-law, Daniel Nugent, when, about ten o'clock,
they observed a strong northerly blast rising, and they accordingly put
in for port. It was a very dark night, as the moon had not yet risen;
they did not land at the harbour, but, as they had been accustomed, at a
creek about two miles below. He walked on first, carrying a part of the
fishing tackle, and his companions followed him at some distance. As he
was proceeding along the sands, he struck his foot against something,
and fell all his length on the ground. His companions came up to assist
him; and, by the light of their lantern, they found that he had fallen
on the body of a man, who was to all appearance dead. Their first
supposition was, that it was the corpse of some person who had been
drowned, and was thrown on shore by the waves; but, upon examination,
they found that the clothes were not wet, and even that the body was not
then cold. They instantly carried it to the cottage of an old woman near
the spot, and endeavoured, but in vain, to restore it to life. He
appeared to be a handsome young man, about five and twenty years of age.
He had apparently been strangled; for there was no sign of any violence,
except the black mark of fingers on his neck.

The first part of this deposition did not in the least interest me; but
when the mark of the fingers was mentioned, I remembered the murder of
my brother, and felt myself extremely agitated; my limbs trembled, and a
mist came over my eyes, which obliged me to lean on a chair for support.
The magistrate observed me with a keen eye, and of course drew an
unfavourable augury from my manner.

The son confirmed his father's account: but when Daniel Nugent was
called, he swore positively that, just before the fall of his companion,
he saw a boat, with a single man in it, at a short distance from the
shore; and, as far as he could judge by the light of a few stars, it was
the same boat in which I had just landed.

A woman deposed, that she lived near the beach, and was standing at the
door of her cottage, waiting for the return of the fishermen, about an
hour before she heard of the discovery of the body, when she saw a boat,
with only one man in it, push off from that part of the shore where the
corpse was afterwards found.

Another woman confirmed the account of the fishermen having brought the
body into her house; it was not cold. They put it into a bed, and rubbed
it; and Daniel went to the town for an apothecary, but life was quite
gone.

Several other men were examined concerning my landing; and they agreed,
that, with the strong north wind that had arisen during the night, it
was very probable that I had beaten about for many hours, and had been
obliged to return nearly to the same spot from which I had departed.
Besides, they observed that it appeared that I had brought the body from
another place, and it was likely, that as I did not appear to know the
shore, I might have put into the harbour ignorant of the distance of the
town of ---- from the place where I had deposited the corpse.

Mr. Johnny, on hearing this evidence, desired that I should be taken
into the room where the body lay for interment that it might be observed
what effect the sight of it would produce upon me. This idea was
probably suggested by the extreme agitation I had exhibited when the
mode of the murder had been described. I was accordingly conducted, by
the magistrate and several other persons, to the inn. I could not help
being struck by the strange coincidences that had taken place during
this eventful night; but, knowing that I had been conversing with
several persons in the island I had inhabited about the time that the
body had been found, I was perfectly tranquil as to the consequences of
the affair.

I entered the room where the corpse lay, and was led up to the coffin.
How can I describe my sensations on beholding it? I feel yet parched
with horror, nor can I reflect on that terrible moment without
shuddering and agony, that faintly reminds me of the anguish of the
recognition. The trial, the presence of the magistrate and witnesses,
passed like a dream from my memory, when I saw the lifeless form of
Brennan Ariella stretched before me. I gasped for breath; and, throwing
myself on the body, I exclaimed, "Have my murderous machinations
deprived you also, my dearest Brennan, of life? Two I have already
destroyed; other victims await their destiny: but you, Ariella, my
friend, my benefactor"----

The human frame could no longer support the agonizing suffering that I
endured, and I was carried out of the room in strong convulsions.

A fever succeeded to this. I lay for two months on the point of death:
my ravings, as I afterwards heard, were frightful; I called myself the
murderer of Rosetta, of Allyson, and of Ariella. Sometimes I entreated
my attendants to assist me in the destruction of the fiend by whom I was
tormented; and, at others, I felt the fingers of the monster already
grasping my neck, and screamed aloud with agony and terror. Fortunately,
as I spoke my native language, Mr. Johnny alone understood me; but my
gestures and bitter cries were sufficient to affright the other
witnesses.

Why did I not die? More miserable than man ever was before, why did I
not sink into forgetfulness and rest? Death snatches away many blooming
children, the only hopes of their doating parents: how many brides and
youthful lovers have been one day in the bloom of health and hope, and
the next a prey for worms and the decay of the tomb! Of what materials
was I made, that I could thus resist so many shocks, which, like the
turning of the wheel, continually renewed the torture.

But I was doomed to live; and, in two months, found myself as awaking
from a dream, in a prison, stretched on a wretched bed, surrounded by
gaolers, turnkeys, bolts, and all the miserable apparatus of a dungeon.
It was morning, I remember, when I thus awoke to understanding: I had
forgotten the particulars of what had happened, and only felt as if some
great misfortune had suddenly overwhelmed me; but when I looked around,
and saw the barred windows, and the squalidness of the room in which I
was, all flashed across my memory, and I groaned bitterly.

This sound disturbed an old woman who was sleeping in a chair beside me.
She was a hired nurse, the wife of one of the turnkeys, and her
countenance expressed all those bad qualities which often characterize
that class. The lines of her face were hard and rude, like that of
persons accustomed to see without sympathizing in sights of misery. Her
tone expressed her entire indifference; she addressed me in English, and
the voice struck me as one that I had heard during my sufferings:

"Are you better now, Sir?" said she.

I replied in the same language, with a feeble voice, "I believe I am;
but if it be all true, if indeed I did not dream, I am sorry that I am
still alive to feel this misery and horror."

"For that matter," replied the old woman, "if you mean about the
gentleman you murdered, I believe that it were better for you if you
were dead, for I fancy it will go hard with you; but you will be hung
when the next sessions come on. However, that's none of my business, I
am sent to nurse you, and get you well; I do my duty with a safe
conscience, it were well if every body did the same."

I turned with loathing from the woman who could utter so unfeeling a
speech to a person just saved, on the very edge of death; but I felt
languid, and unable to reflect on all that had passed. The whole series
of my life appeared to me as a dream; I sometimes doubted if indeed it
were all true, for it never presented itself to my mind with the force
of reality.

As the images that floated before me became more distinct, I grew
feverish; a darkness pressed around me; no one was near me who soothed
me with the gentle voice of love; no dear hand supported me. The
physician came and prescribed medicines, and the old woman prepared them
for me; but utter carelessness was visible in the first, and the
expression of brutality was strongly marked in the visage of the second.
Who could be interested in the fate of a murderer, but the hangman who
would gain his fee?

These were my first reflections; but I soon learned that Mr. Johnny had
shewn me extreme kindness. He had caused the best room in the prison to
be prepared for me (wretched indeed was the best); and it was he who had
provided a physician and a nurse. It is true, he seldom came to see me;
for, although he ardently desired to relieve the sufferings of every
human creature, he did not wish to be present at the agonies and
miserable ravings of a murderer. He came, therefore, sometimes to see
that I was not neglected; but his visits were short, and at long
intervals.

One day, when I was gradually recovering, I was seated in a chair, my
eyes half open, and my cheeks livid like those in death, I was overcome
by gloom and misery, and often reflected I had better seek death than
remain miserably pent up only to be let loose in a world replete with
wretchedness. At one time I considered whether I should not declare
myself guilty, and suffer the penalty of the law, less innocent than
poor Allyson had been. Such were my thoughts, when the door of my
apartment was opened, and Mr. Johnny entered. His countenance expressed
sympathy and compassion; he drew a chair close to mine, and addressed me
in French--

"I fear that this place is very shocking to you; can I do any thing to
make you more comfortable?"

"I thank you; but all that you mention is nothing to me: on the whole
earth there is no comfort which I am capable of receiving."

"I know that the sympathy of a stranger can be but of little relief to
one borne down as you are by so strange a misfortune. But you will, I
hope, soon quit this melancholy abode; for, doubtless, evidence can
easily be brought to free you from the criminal charge."

"That is my least concern: I am, by a course of strange events, become
the most miserable of mortals. Persecuted and tortured as I am and have
been, can death be any evil to me?"

"Nothing indeed could be more unfortunate and agonizing than the strange
chances that have lately occurred. You were thrown, by some surprising
accident, on this shore, renowned for its hospitality: seized
immediately, and charged with murder. The first sight that was presented
to your eyes was the body of your friend, murdered in so unaccountable a
manner, and placed, as it were, by some fiend across your path."

As Mr. Johnny said this, notwithstanding the agitation I endured on this
retrospect of my sufferings, I also felt considerable surprise at the
knowledge he seemed to possess concerning me. I suppose some
astonishment was exhibited in my countenance; for Mr. Johnny hastened to
say--

"It was not until a day or two after your illness that I thought of
examining your dress, that I might discover some trace by which I could
send to your relations an account of your misfortune and illness. I
found several letters, and, among others, one which I discovered from
its commencement to be from your father. I instantly wrote to Geneva:
nearly two months have elapsed since the departure of my letter.--But
you are ill; even now you tremble: you are unfit for agitation of any
kind."

"This suspense is a thousand times worse than the most horrible event:
tell me what new scene of death has been acted, and whose murder I am
now to lament."

"Your family is perfectly well," said Mr. Johnny, with gentleness; "and
some one, a friend, is come to visit you."

I know not by what chain of thought the idea presented itself, but it
instantly darted into my mind that the murderer had come to mock at my
misery, and taunt me with the death of Ariella, as a new incitement for
me to comply with his hellish desires. I put my hand before my eyes, and
cried out in agony--

"Oh! take him away! I cannot see him; for God's sake, do not let him
enter!"

Mr. Johnny regarded me with a troubled countenance. He could not help
regarding my exclamation as a presumption of my guilt, and said, in
rather a severe tone--

"I should have thought, young man, that the presence of your father
would have been welcome, instead of inspiring such violent repugnance."

"My father!" cried I, while every feature and every muscle was relaxed
from anguish to pleasure. "Is my father, indeed, come? How kind, how
very kind. But where is he, why does he not hasten to me?"

My change of manner surprised and pleased the magistrate; perhaps he
thought that my former exclamation was a momentary return of delirium,
and now he instantly resumed his former benevolence. He rose, and
quitted the room with my nurse, and in a moment my father entered it.

Nothing, at this moment, could have given me greater pleasure than the
arrival of my father. I stretched out my hand to him, and cried--

"Are you then safe--and Raiden--and Ernest?"

My father calmed me with assurances of their welfare, and endeavoured,
by dwelling on these subjects so interesting to my heart, to raise my
desponding spirits; but he soon felt that a prison cannot be the abode
of cheerfulness. "What a place is this that you inhabit, my son!" said
he, looking mournfully at the barred windows, and wretched appearance of
the room. "You travelled to seek happiness, but a fatality seems to
pursue you. And poor Ariella--"

The name of my unfortunate and murdered friend was an agitation too
great to be endured in my weak state; I shed tears.

"Alas! yes, my father," replied I; "some destiny of the most horrible
kind hangs over me, and I must live to fulfil it, or surely I should
have died on the coffin of Brennan."

We were not allowed to converse for any length of time, for the
precarious state of my health rendered every precaution necessary that
could insure tranquillity. Mr. Johnny came in, and insisted that my
strength should not be exhausted by too much exertion. But the
appearance of my father was to me like that of my good angel, and I
gradually recovered my health.

As my sickness quitted me, I was absorbed by a gloomy and black
melancholy, that nothing could dissipate. The image of Ariella was for
ever before me, ghastly and murdered. More than once the agitation into
which these reflections threw me made my friends dread a dangerous
relapse. Alas! why did they preserve so miserable and detested a life?
It was surely that I might fulfil my destiny, which is now drawing to a
close. Soon, oh, very soon, will death extinguish these throbbings, and
relieve me from the mighty weight of anguish that bears me to the dust;
and, in executing the award of justice, I shall also sink to rest. Then
the appearance of death was distant, although the wish was ever present
to my thoughts; and I often sat for hours motionless and speechless,
wishing for some mighty revolution that might bury me and my destroyer
in its ruins.

The season of the assizes approached. I had already been three months
in prison; and although I was still weak, and in continual danger of a
relapse, I was obliged to travel nearly a hundred miles to the
county-town, where the court was held. Mr. Johnny charged himself with
every care of collecting witnesses, and arranging my defence. I was
spared the disgrace of appearing publicly as a criminal, as the case was
not brought before the court that decides on life and death. The grand
jury rejected the bill, on its being proved that I was on the Orkney
Islands at the hour the body of my friend was found, and a fortnight
after my removal I was liberated from prison.

My father was enraptured on finding me freed from the vexations of a
criminal charge, that I was again allowed to breathe the fresh
atmosphere, and allowed to return to my native country. I did not
participate in these feelings; for to me the walls of a dungeon or a
palace were alike hateful. The cup of life was poisoned for ever; and
although the sun shone upon me, as upon the happy and gay of heart, I
saw around me nothing but a dense and frightful darkness, penetrated by
no light but the glimmer of two eyes that glared upon me. Sometimes they
were the expressive eyes of Brennan, languishing in death, the dark orbs
nearly covered by the lids, and the long black lashes that fringed them;
sometimes it was the watery clouded eyes of the monster, as I first saw
them in my chamber at Ingolstadt.

My father tried to awaken in me the feelings of affection. He talked of
Geneva, which I should soon visit--of Raiden, and Ernest; but these
words only drew deep groans from me. Sometimes, indeed, I felt a wish
for happiness; and thought, with melancholy delight, of my beloved
cousin; or longed, with a devouring _maladie du pays_, to see once more
the blue lake and rapid Rhone, that had been so dear to me in early
childhood: but my general state of feeling was a torpor, in which a
prison was as welcome a residence as the divinest scene in nature; and
these fits were seldom interrupted, but by paroxysms of anguish and
despair. At these moments I often endeavoured to put an end to the
existence I loathed; and it required unceasing attendance and vigilance
to restrain me from committing some dreadful act of violence.

I remember, as I quitted the prison, I heard one of the men say, "He may
be innocent of the murder, but he has certainly a bad conscience." These
words struck me. A bad conscience! yes, surely I had one. Rosetta,
Allyson, and Ariella, had died through my infernal machinations; "And
whose death," cried I, "is to finish the tragedy? Ah! my father, do not
remain in this wretched country; take me where I may forget myself, my
existence, and all the world."

My father easily acceded to my desire; and, after having taken leave of
Mr. Johnny, we hastened to Dublin. I felt as if I was relieved from a
heavy weight, when the packet sailed with a fair wind from Ireland, and
I had quitted for ever the country which had been to me the scene of so
much misery.

It was midnight. My father slept in the cabin; and I lay on the deck,
looking at the stars, and listening to the dashing of the waves. I
hailed the darkness that shut Ireland from my sight, and my pulse beat
with a feverish joy, when I reflected that I should soon see Geneva. The
past appeared to me in the light of a frightful dream; yet the vessel in
which I was, the wind that blew me from the detested shore of Ireland,
and the sea which surrounded me, told me too forcibly that I was
deceived by no vision, and that Ariella, my friend and dearest
companion, had fallen a victim to me and the monster of my creation. I
repassed, in my memory, my whole life; my quiet happiness while residing
with my family in Geneva, the death of my mother, and my departure for
Ingolstadt. I remembered shuddering at the mad enthusiasm that hurried
me on to the creation of my hideous enemy, and I called to mind the
night during which he first lived. I was unable to pursue the train of
thought; a thousand feelings pressed upon me, and I wept bitterly.

Ever since my recovery from the fever I had been in the custom of taking
every night a small quantity of laudanum; for it was by means of this
drug only that I was enabled to gain the rest necessary for the
preservation of life. Oppressed by the recollection of my various
misfortunes, I now took a double dose, and soon slept profoundly. But
sleep did not afford me respite from thought and misery; my dreams
presented a thousand objects that scared me. Towards morning I was
possessed by a kind of night-mare; I felt the fiend's grasp in my neck,
and could not free myself from it; groans and cries rung in my ears. My
father, who was watching over me, perceiving my restlessness, awoke me,
and pointed to the port of Holyhead, which we were now entering.






We had resolved not to go to London, but to cross the country to
Portsmouth, and thence to embark for Havre. I preferred this plan
principally because I dreaded to see again those places in which I had
enjoyed a few moments of tranquillity with my beloved Ariella. I thought
with horror of seeing again those persons whom we had been accustomed to
visit together, and who might make inquiries concerning an event, the
very remembrance of which made me again feel the pang I endured when I
gazed on his lifeless form in the inn at ----.

As for my father, his desires and exertions were bounded to the again
seeing me restored to health and peace of mind. His tenderness and
attentions were unremitting; my grief and gloom was obstinate, but he
would not despair. Sometimes he thought that I felt deeply the
degradation of being obliged to answer a charge of murder, and he
endeavoured to prove to me the futility of pride.

"Alas! my father," said I, "how little do you know me. Human beings,
their feelings and passions, would indeed be degraded, if such a wretch
as I felt pride. Allyson, poor unhappy Allyson, was as innocent as I,
and she suffered the same charge; she died for it; and I am the cause
of this--I murdered her. Rosetta, Allyson, and Brennan--they all died by
my hands."

My father had often, during my imprisonment, heard me make the same
assertion; when I thus accused myself, he sometimes seemed to desire an
explanation, and at others he appeared to consider it as caused by
delirium, and that, during my illness, some idea of this kind had
presented itself to my imagination, the remembrance of which I preserved
in my convalescence. I avoided explanation, and maintained a continual
silence concerning the wretch I had created. I had a feeling that I
should be supposed mad, and this for ever chained my tongue, when I
would have given the whole world to have confided the fatal secret.

Upon this occasion my father said, with an expression of unbounded
wonder, "What do you mean, Kiran? are you mad? My dear son, I entreat
you never to make such an assertion again."

"I am not mad," I cried energetically; "the sun and the heavens, who
have viewed my operations, can bear witness of my truth. I am the
assassin of those most innocent victims; they died by my machinations. A
thousand times would I have shed my own blood, drop by drop, to have
saved their lives; but I could not, my father, indeed I could not
sacrifice the whole human race."

The conclusion of this speech convinced my father that my ideas were
deranged, and he instantly changed the subject of our conversation, and
endeavoured to alter the course of my thoughts. He wished as much as
possible to obliterate the memory of the scenes that had taken place in
Ireland, and never alluded to them, or suffered me to speak of my
misfortunes.

As time passed away I became more calm: misery had her dwelling in my
heart, but I no longer talked in the same incoherent manner of my own
crimes; sufficient for me was the consciousness of them. By the utmost
self-violence, I curbed the imperious voice of wretchedness, which
sometimes desired to declare itself to the whole world; and my manners
were calmer and more composed than they had ever been since my journey
to the sea of ice.

We arrived at Havre on the 8th of May, and instantly proceeded to Paris,
where my father had some business which detained us a few weeks. In this
city, I received the following letter from Raiden:--

       *       *       *       *       *

"_To_ KIRAN JOEY.

"MY DEAREST FRIEND,

"It gave me the greatest pleasure to receive a letter from my uncle
dated at Paris; you are no longer at a formidable distance, and I may
hope to see you in less than a fortnight. My poor cousin, how much you
must have suffered! I expect to see you looking even more ill than when
you quitted Geneva. This winter has been passed most miserably, tortured
as I have been by anxious suspense; yet I hope to see peace in your
countenance, and to find that your heart is not totally devoid of
comfort and tranquillity.

"Yet I fear that the same feelings now exist that made you so miserable
a year ago, even perhaps augmented by time. I would not disturb you at
this period, when so many misfortunes weigh upon you; but a conversation
that I had with my uncle previous to his departure renders some
explanation necessary before we meet.

"Explanation! you may possibly say; what can Raiden have to explain?
If you really say this, my questions are answered, and I have no more to
do than to sign myself your affectionate cousin. But you are distant
from me, and it is possible that you may dread, and yet be pleased with
this explanation; and, in a probability of this being the case, I dare
not any longer postpone writing what, during your absence, I have often
wished to express to you, but have never had the courage to begin.

"You well know, Kiran, that our union had been the favourite plan of
your parents ever since our infancy. We were told this when young, and
taught to look forward to it as an event that would certainly take
place. We were affectionate playfellows during childhood, and, I
believe, dear and valued friends to one another as we grew older. But as
brother and sister often entertain a lively affection towards each
other, without desiring a more intimate union, may not such also be our
case? Tell me, dearest Kiran. Answer me, I conjure you, by our mutual
happiness, with simple truth--Do you not love another?

"You have travelled; you have spent several years of your life at
Ingolstadt; and I confess to you, my friend, that when I saw you last
autumn so unhappy, flying to solitude, from the society of every
creature, I could not help supposing that you might regret our
connexion, and believe yourself bound in honour to fulfil the wishes of
your parents, although they opposed themselves to your inclinations. But
this is false reasoning. I confess to you, my cousin, that I love you,
and that in my airy dreams of futurity you have been my constant friend
and companion. But it is your happiness I desire as well as my own, when
I declare to you, that our marriage would render me eternally miserable,
unless it were the dictate of your own free choice. Even now I weep to
think, that, borne down as you are by the cruelest misfortunes, you may
stifle; by the word _honour_, all hope of that love and happiness which
would alone restore you to yourself. I, who have so interested an
affection for you, may increase your miseries ten-fold, by being an
obstacle to your wishes. Ah, Kiran, be assured that your cousin and
playmate has too sincere a love for you not to be made miserable by this
supposition. Be happy, my friend; and if you obey me in this one
request, remain satisfied that nothing on earth will have the power to
interrupt my tranquillity.

"Do not let this letter disturb you; do not answer it to-morrow, or the
next day, or even until you come, if it will give you pain. My uncle
will send me news of your health; and if I see but one smile on your
lips when we meet, occasioned by this or any other exertion of mine, I
shall need no other happiness.

"RAIDEN MELINDA.

"Geneva, May 18th. 17--."

       *       *       *       *       *

This letter revived in my memory what I had before forgotten, the threat
of the fiend--"_I will be with you on your wedding-night!_" Such was my
sentence, and on that night would the daemon employ every art to destroy
me, and tear me from the glimpse of happiness which promised partly to
console my sufferings. On that night he had determined to consummate his
crimes by my death. Well, be it so; a deadly struggle would then
assuredly take place, in which if he was victorious, I should be at
peace, and his power over me be at an end. If he were vanquished, I
should be a free man. Alas! what freedom? such as the peasant enjoys
when his family have been massacred before his eyes, his cottage burnt,
his lands laid waste, and he is turned adrift, homeless, pennyless, and
alone, but free. Such would be my liberty, except that in my Raiden I
possessed a treasure; alas! balanced by those horrors of remorse and
guilt, which would pursue me until death.

Sweet and beloved Raiden! I read and re-read her letter, and some
softened feelings stole into my heart, and dared to whisper paradisaical
dreams of love and joy; but the apple was already eaten, and the
angel's arm bared to drive me from all hope. Yet I would die to make her
happy. If the monster executed his threat, death was inevitable; yet,
again, I considered whether my marriage would hasten my fate. My
destruction might indeed arrive a few months sooner; but if my torturer
should suspect that I postponed it, influenced by his menaces, he would
surely find other, and perhaps more dreadful means of revenge. He had
vowed _to be with me on my wedding-night_, yet he did not consider that
threat as binding him to peace in the mean time; for, as if to shew me
that he was not yet satiated with blood, he had murdered Ariella
immediately after the enunciation of his threats. I resolved, therefore,
that if my immediate union with my cousin would conduce either to her's
or my father's happiness, my adversary's designs against my life should
not retard it a single hour.

In this state of mind I wrote to Raiden. My letter was calm and
affectionate. "I fear, my beloved girl," I said, "little happiness
remains for us on earth; yet all that I may one day enjoy is concentered
in you. Chase away your idle fears; to you alone do I consecrate my
life, and my endeavours for contentment. I have one secret, Raiden, a
dreadful one; when revealed to you, it will chill your frame with
horror, and then, far from being surprised at my misery, you will only
wonder that I survive what I have endured. I will confide this tale of
misery and terror to you the day after our marriage shall take place;
for, my sweet cousin, there must be perfect confidence between us. But
until then, I conjure you, do not mention or allude to it. This I most
earnestly entreat, and I know you will comply."

In about a week after the arrival of Raiden's letter, we returned to
Geneva. My cousin welcomed me with warm affection; yet tears were in her
eyes, as she beheld my emaciated frame and feverish cheeks. I saw a
change in her also. She was thinner, and had lost much of that heavenly
vivacity that had before charmed me; but her gentleness, and soft looks
of compassion, made her a more fit companion for one blasted and
miserable as I was.

The tranquillity which I now enjoyed did not endure. Memory brought
madness with it; and when I thought on what had passed, a real insanity
possessed me; sometimes I was furious, and burnt with rage, sometimes
low and despondent. I neither spoke or looked, but sat motionless,
bewildered by the multitude of miseries that overcame me.

Raiden alone had the power to draw me from these fits; her gentle
voice would soothe me when transported by passion, and inspire me with
human feelings when sunk in torpor. She wept with me, and for me. When
reason returned, she would remonstrate, and endeavour to inspire me with
resignation. Ah! it is well for the unfortunate to be resigned, but for
the guilty there is no peace. The agonies of remorse poison the luxury
there is otherwise sometimes found in indulging the excess of grief.

Soon after my arrival my father spoke of my immediate marriage with my
cousin. I remained silent.

"Have you, then, some other attachment?"

"None on earth. I love Raiden, and look forward to our union with
delight. Let the day therefore be fixed; and on it I will consecrate
myself, in life or death, to the happiness of my cousin."

"My dear Kiran, do not speak thus. Heavy misfortunes have befallen us;
but let us only cling closer to what remains, and transfer our love for
those whom we have lost to those who yet live. Our circle will be small,
but bound close by the ties of affection and mutual misfortune. And when
time shall have softened your despair, new and dear objects of care will
be born to replace those of whom we have been so cruelly deprived."

Such were the lessons of my father. But to me the remembrance of the
threat returned: nor can you wonder, that, omnipotent as the fiend had
yet been in his deeds of blood, I should almost regard him as
invincible; and that when he had pronounced the words, "_I shall be with
you on your wedding-night_," I should regard the threatened fate as
unavoidable. But death was no evil to me, if the loss of Raiden were
balanced with it; and I therefore, with a contented and even cheerful
countenance, agreed with my father, that if my cousin would consent, the
ceremony should take place in ten days, and thus put, as I imagined, the
seal to my fate.

Great God! if for one instant I had thought what might be the hellish
intention of my fiendish adversary, I would rather have banished myself
for ever from my native country, and wandered a friendless outcast over
the earth, than have consented to this miserable marriage. But, as if
possessed of magic powers, the monster had blinded me to his real
intentions; and when I thought that I prepared only my own death, I
hastened that of a far dearer victim.

As the period fixed for our marriage drew nearer, whether from cowardice
or a prophetic feeling, I felt my heart sink within me. But I concealed
my feelings by an appearance of hilarity, that brought smiles and joy to
the countenance of my father, but hardly deceived the ever-watchful and
nicer eye of Raiden. She looked forward to our union with placid
contentment, not unmingled with a little fear, which past misfortunes
had impressed, that what now appeared certain and tangible happiness,
might soon dissipate into an airy dream, and leave no trace but deep and
everlasting regret.

Preparations were made for the event; congratulatory visits were
received; and all wore a smiling appearance. I shut up, as well as I
could, in my own heart the anxiety that preyed there, and entered with
seeming earnestness into the plans of my father, although they might
only serve as the decorations of my tragedy. A house was purchased for
us near Cologny, by which we should enjoy the pleasures of the country,
and yet be so near Geneva as to see my father every day; who would
still reside within the walls, for the benefit of Ernest, that he might
follow his studies at the schools.

In the mean time I took every precaution to defend my person, in case
the fiend should openly attack me. I carried pistols and a dagger
constantly about me, and was ever on the watch to prevent artifice; and
by these means gained a greater degree of tranquillity. Indeed, as the
period approached, the threat appeared more as a delusion, not to be
regarded as worthy to disturb my peace, while the happiness I hoped for
in my marriage wore a greater appearance of certainty, as the day fixed
for its solemnization drew nearer, and I heard it continually spoken of
as an occurrence which no accident could possibly prevent.

Raiden seemed happy; my tranquil demeanour contributed greatly to
calm her mind. But on the day that was to fulfil my wishes and my
destiny, she was melancholy, and a presentiment of evil pervaded her;
and perhaps also she thought of the dreadful secret, which I had
promised to reveal to her the following day. My father was in the mean
time overjoyed, and, in the bustle of preparation, only observed in the
melancholy of his niece the diffidence of a bride.

After the ceremony was performed, a large party assembled at my
father's; but it was agreed that Raiden and I should pass the
afternoon and night at Evian, and return to Cologny the next morning. As
the day was fair, and the wind favourable, we resolved to go by water.

Those were the last moments of my life during which I enjoyed the
feeling of happiness. We passed rapidly along: the sun was hot, but we
were sheltered from its rays by a kind of canopy, while we enjoyed the
beauty of the scene, sometimes on one side of the lake, where we saw
Mont Saleve, the pleasant banks of Montalegre, and at a distance,
surmounting all, the beautiful Mont Blanc, and the assemblage of snowy
mountains that in vain endeavour to emulate her; sometimes coasting the
opposite banks, we saw the mighty Jura opposing its dark side to the
ambition that would quit its native country, and an almost
insurmountable barrier to the invader who should wish to enslave it.

I took the hand of Raiden: "You are sorrowful, my love. Ah! if you
knew what I have suffered, and what I may yet endure, you would
endeavour to let me taste the quiet, and freedom from despair, that this
one day at least permits me to enjoy."

"Be happy, my dear Kiran," replied Raiden; "there is, I hope,
nothing to distress you; and be assured that if a lively joy is not
painted in my face, my heart is contented. Something whispers to me not
to depend too much on the prospect that is opened before us; but I will
not listen to such a sinister voice. Observe how fast we move along, and
how the clouds which sometimes obscure, and sometimes rise above the
dome of Mont Blanc, render this scene of beauty still more interesting.
Look also at the innumerable fish that are swimming in the clear
waters, where we can distinguish every pebble that lies at the bottom.
What a divine day! how happy and serene all nature appears!"

Thus Raiden endeavoured to divert her thoughts and mine from all
reflection upon melancholy subjects. But her temper was fluctuating; joy
for a few instants shone in her eyes, but it continually gave place to
distraction and reverie.

The sun sunk lower in the heavens; we passed the river Drance, and
observed its path through the chasms of the higher, and the glens of the
lower hills. The Alps here come closer to the lake, and we approached
the amphitheatre of mountains which forms its eastern boundary. The
spire of Evian shone under the woods that surrounded it, and the range
of mountain above mountain by which it was overhung.

The wind, which had hitherto carried us along with amazing rapidity,
sunk at sunset to a light breeze; the soft air just ruffled the water,
and caused a pleasant motion among the trees as we approached the shore,
from which it wafted the most delightful scent of flowers and hay. The
sun sunk beneath the horizon as we landed; and as I touched the shore, I
felt those cares and fears revive, which soon were to clasp me, and
cling to me for ever.






It was eight o'clock when we landed; we walked for a short time on the
shore, enjoying the transitory light, and then retired to the inn, and
contemplated the lovely scene of waters, woods, and mountains, obscured
in darkness, yet still displaying their black outlines.

The wind, which had fallen in the south, now rose with great violence in
the west. The moon had reached her summit in the heavens, and was
beginning to descend; the clouds swept across it swifter than the flight
of the vulture, and dimmed her rays, while the lake reflected the scene
of the busy heavens, rendered still busier by the restless waves that
were beginning to rise. Suddenly a heavy storm of rain descended.

I had been calm during the day; but so soon as night obscured the shapes
of objects, a thousand fears arose in my mind. I was anxious and
watchful, while my right hand grasped a pistol which was hidden in my
bosom; every sound terrified me; but I resolved that I would sell my
life dearly, and not relax the impending conflict until my own life, or
that of my adversary, were extinguished.

Raiden observed my agitation for some time in timid and fearful
silence; at length she said, "What is it that agitates you, my dear
Kiran? What is it you fear?"

"Oh! peace, peace, my love," replied I, "this night, and all will be
safe: but this night is dreadful, very dreadful."

I passed an hour in this state of mind, when suddenly I reflected how
dreadful the combat which I momentarily expected would be to my wife,
and I earnestly entreated her to retire, resolving not to join her until
I had obtained some knowledge as to the situation of my enemy.

She left me, and I continued some time walking up and down the passages
of the house, and inspecting every corner that might afford a retreat to
my adversary. But I discovered no trace of him, and was beginning to
conjecture that some fortunate chance had intervened to prevent the
execution of his menaces; when suddenly I heard a shrill and dreadful
scream. It came from the room into which Raiden had retired. As I
heard it, the whole truth rushed into my mind, my arms dropped, the
motion of every muscle and fibre was suspended; I could feel the blood
trickling in my veins, and tingling in the extremities of my limbs. This
state lasted but for an instant; the scream was repeated, and I rushed
into the room.

Great God! why did I not then expire! Why am I here to relate the
destruction of the best hope, and the purest creature of earth. She was
there, lifeless and inanimate, thrown across the bed, her head hanging
down, and her pale and distorted features half covered by her hair.
Every where I turn I see the same figure--her bloodless arms and relaxed
form flung by the murderer on its bridal bier. Could I behold this, and
live? Alas! life is obstinate, and clings closest where it is most
hated. For a moment only did I lose recollection; I fainted.

When I recovered, I found myself surrounded by the people of the inn;
their countenances expressed a breathless terror: but the horror of
others appeared only as a mockery, a shadow of the feelings that
oppressed me. I escaped from them to the room where lay the body of
Raiden, my love, my wife, so lately living, so dear, so worthy. She
had been moved from the posture in which I had first beheld her; and
now, as she lay, her head upon her arm, and a handkerchief thrown across
her face and neck, I might have supposed her asleep. I rushed towards
her, and embraced her with ardour; but the deathly languor and coldness
of the limbs told me, that what I now held in my arms had ceased to be
the Raiden whom I had loved and cherished. The murderous mark of the
fiend's grasp was on her neck, and the breath had ceased to issue from
her lips.

While I still hung over her in the agony of despair, I happened to look
up. The windows of the room had before been darkened; and I felt a kind
of panic on seeing the pale yellow light of the moon illuminate the
chamber. The shutters had been thrown back; and, with a sensation of
horror not to be described, I saw at the open window a figure the most
hideous and abhorred. A grin was on the face of the monster; he seemed
to jeer, as with his fiendish finger he pointed towards the corpse of my
wife. I rushed towards the window, and drawing a pistol from my bosom,
shot; but he eluded me, leaped from his station, and, running with the
swiftness of lightning, plunged into the lake.

The report of the pistol brought a crowd into the room. I pointed to the
spot where he had disappeared, and we followed the track with boats;
nets were cast, but in vain. After passing several hours, we returned
hopeless, most of my companions believing it to have been a form
conjured by my fancy. After having landed, they proceeded to search the
country, parties going in different directions among the woods and
vines.

I did not accompany them; I was exhausted: a film covered my eyes, and
my skin was parched with the heat of fever. In this state I lay on a
bed, hardly conscious of what had happened; my eyes wandered round the
room, as if to seek something that I had lost.

At length I remembered that my father would anxiously expect the return
of Raiden and myself, and that I must return alone. This reflection
brought tears into my eyes, and I wept for a long time; but my thoughts
rambled to various subjects, reflecting on my misfortunes, and their
cause. I was bewildered in a cloud of wonder and horror. The death of
Rosetta, the execution of Allyson, the murder of Ariella, and lastly of
my wife; even at that moment I knew not that my only remaining friends
were safe from the malignity of the fiend; my father even now might be
writhing under his grasp, and Ernest might be dead at his feet. This
idea made me shudder, and recalled me to action. I started up, and
resolved to return to Geneva with all possible speed.

There were no horses to be procured, and I must return by the lake; but
the wind was unfavourable, and the rain fell in torrents. However, it
was hardly morning, and I might reasonably hope to arrive by night. I
hired men to row, and took an oar myself, for I had always experienced
relief from mental torment in bodily exercise. But the overflowing
misery I now felt, and the excess of agitation that I endured, rendered
me incapable of any exertion. I threw down the oar; and, leaning my head
upon my hands, gave way to every gloomy idea that arose. If I looked up,
I saw the scenes which were familiar to me in my happier time, and which
I had contemplated but the day before in the company of her who was now
but a shadow and a recollection. Tears streamed from my eyes. The rain
had ceased for a moment, and I saw the fish play in the waters as they
had done a few hours before; they had then been observed by Raiden.
Nothing is so painful to the human mind as a great and sudden change.
The sun might shine, or the clouds might lour; but nothing could appear
to me as it had done the day before. A fiend had snatched from me every
hope of future happiness: no creature had ever been so miserable as I
was; so frightful an event is single in the history of man.

But why should I dwell upon the incidents that followed this last
overwhelming event. Mine has been a tale of horrors; I have reached
their _acme_, and what I must now relate can but be tedious to you. Know
that, one by one, my friends were snatched away; I was left desolate. My
own strength is exhausted; and I must tell, in a few words, what remains
of my hideous narration.

I arrived at Geneva. My father and Ernest yet lived; but the former sunk
under the tidings that I bore. I see him now, excellent and venerable
old man! his eyes wandered in vacancy, for they had lost their charm and
their delight--his niece, his more than daughter, whom he doated on with
all that affection which a man feels, who, in the decline of life,
having few affections, clings more earnestly to those that remain.
Cursed, cursed be the fiend that brought misery on his grey hairs, and
doomed him to waste in wretchedness! He could not live under the horrors
that were accumulated around him; an apoplectic fit was brought on, and
in a few days he died in my arms.

What then became of me? I know not; I lost sensation, and chains and
darkness were the only objects that pressed upon me. Sometimes, indeed,
I dreamt that I wandered in flowery meadows and pleasant vales with the
friends of my youth; but awoke, and found myself in a dungeon.
Melancholy followed, but by degrees I gained a clear conception of my
miseries and situation, and was then released from my prison. For they
had called me mad; and during many months, as I understood, a solitary
cell had been my habitation.

But liberty had been a useless gift to me had I not, as I awakened to
reason, at the same time awakened to revenge. As the memory of past
misfortunes pressed upon me, I began to reflect on their cause--the
monster whom I had created, the miserable daemon whom I had sent abroad
into the world for my destruction. I was possessed by a maddening rage
when I thought of him, and desired and ardently prayed that I might have
him within my grasp to wreak a great and signal revenge on his cursed
head.

Nor did my hate long confine itself to useless wishes; I began to
reflect on the best means of securing him; and for this purpose, about a
month after my release, I repaired to a criminal judge in the town, and
told him that I had an accusation to make; that I knew the destroyer of
my family; and that I required him to exert his whole authority for the
apprehension of the murderer.

The magistrate listened to me with attention and kindness: "Be assured,
sir," said he, "no pains or exertions on my part shall be spared to
discover the villain."

"I thank you," replied I; "listen, therefore, to the deposition that I
have to make. It is indeed a tale so strange, that I should fear you
would not credit it, were there not something in truth which, however
wonderful, forces conviction. The story is too connected to be mistaken
for a dream, and I have no motive for falsehood." My manner, as I thus
addressed him, was impressive, but calm; I had formed in my own heart a
resolution to pursue my destroyer to death; and this purpose quieted my
agony, and provisionally reconciled me to life. I now related my history
briefly, but with firmness and precision, marking the dates with
accuracy, and never deviating into invective or exclamation.

The magistrate appeared at first perfectly incredulous, but as I
continued he became more attentive and interested; I saw him sometimes
shudder with horror, at others a lively surprise, unmingled with
disbelief, was painted on his countenance.

When I had concluded my narration, I said. "This is the being whom I
accuse, and for whose detection and punishment I call upon you to exert
your whole power. It is your duty as a magistrate, and I believe and
hope that your feelings as a man will not revolt from the execution of
those functions on this occasion."

This address caused a considerable change in the physiognomy of my
auditor. He had heard my story with that half kind of belief that is
given to a tale of spirits and supernatural events; but when he was
called upon to act officially in consequence, the whole tide of his
incredulity returned. He, however, answered mildly, "I would willingly
afford you every aid in your pursuit; but the creature of whom you
speak appears to have powers which would put all my exertions to
defiance. Who can follow an animal which can traverse the sea of ice,
and inhabit caves and dens, where no man would venture to intrude?
Besides, some months have elapsed since the commission of his crimes,
and no one can conjecture to what place he has wandered, or what region
he may now inhabit."

"I do not doubt that he hovers near the spot which I inhabit; and if he
has indeed taken refuge in the Alps, he may be hunted like the chamois,
and destroyed as a beast of prey. But I perceive your thoughts: you do
not credit my narrative, and do not intend to pursue my enemy with the
punishment which is his desert."

As I spoke, rage sparkled in my eyes; the magistrate was intimidated;
"You are mistaken," said he, "I will exert myself; and if it is in my
power to seize the monster, be assured that he shall suffer punishment
proportionate to his crimes. But I fear, from what you have yourself
described to be his properties, that this will prove impracticable, and
that, while every proper measure is pursued, you should endeavour to
make up your mind to disappointment."

"That cannot be; but all that I can say will be of little avail. My
revenge is of no moment to you; yet, while I allow it to be a vice, I
confess that it is the devouring and only passion of my soul. My rage is
unspeakable, when I reflect that the murderer, whom I have turned loose
upon society, still exists. You refuse my just demand: I have but one
resource; and I devote myself, either in my life or death, to his
destruction."

I trembled with excess of agitation as I said this; there was a phrenzy
in my manner, and something, I doubt not, of that haughty fierceness,
which the martyrs of old are said to have possessed. But to a Genevan
magistrate, whose mind was occupied by far other ideas than those of
devotion and heroism, this elevation of mind had much the appearance of
madness. He endeavoured to soothe me as a nurse does a child, and
reverted to my tale as the effects of delirium.

"Man," I cried, "how ignorant art thou in thy pride of wisdom! Cease;
you know not what it is you say."

I broke from the house angry and disturbed, and retired to meditate on
some other mode of action.






My present situation was one in which all voluntary thought was
swallowed up and lost. I was hurried away by fury; revenge alone endowed
me with strength and composure; it modelled my feelings, and allowed me
to be calculating and calm, at periods when otherwise delirium or death
would have been my portion.

My first resolution was to quit Geneva for ever; my country, which, when
I was happy and beloved, was dear to me, now, in my adversity, became
hateful. I provided myself with a sum of money, together with a few
jewels which had belonged to my mother, and departed.

And now my wanderings began, which are to cease but with life. I have
traversed a vast portion of the earth, and have endured all the
hardships which travellers, in deserts and barbarous countries, are wont
to meet. How I have lived I hardly know; many times have I stretched my
failing limbs upon the sandy plain, and prayed for death. But revenge
kept me alive; I dared not die, and leave my adversary in being.

When I quitted Geneva, my first labour was to gain some clue by which I
might trace the steps of my fiendish enemy. But my plan was unsettled;
and I wandered many hours around the confines of the town, uncertain
what path I should pursue. As night approached, I found myself at the
entrance of the cemetery where Rosetta, Raiden, and my father,
reposed. I entered it, and approached the tomb which marked their
graves. Every thing was silent, except the leaves of the trees, which
were gently agitated by the wind; the night was nearly dark; and the
scene would have been solemn and affecting even to an uninterested
observer. The spirits of the departed seemed to flit around, and to cast
a shadow, which was felt but seen not, around the head of the mourner.

The deep grief which this scene had at first excited quickly gave way to
rage and despair. They were dead, and I lived; their murderer also
lived, and to destroy him I must drag out my weary existence. I knelt on
the grass, and kissed the earth, and with quivering lips exclaimed, "By
the sacred earth on which I kneel, by the shades that wander near me, by
the deep and eternal grief that I feel, I swear; and by thee, O Night,
and by the spirits that preside over thee, I swear to pursue the daemon,
who caused this misery, until he or I shall perish in mortal conflict.
For this purpose I will preserve my life: to execute this dear revenge,
will I again behold the sun, and tread the green herbage of earth, which
otherwise should vanish from my eyes for ever. And I call on you,
spirits of the dead; and on you, wandering ministers of vengeance, to
aid and conduct me in my work. Let the cursed and hellish monster drink
deep of agony; let him feel the despair that now torments me."

I had begun my adjuration with solemnity, and an awe which almost
assured me that the shades of my murdered friends heard and approved my
devotion; but the furies possessed me as I concluded, and rage choaked
my utterance.

I was answered through the stillness of night by a loud and fiendish
laugh. It rung on my ears long and heavily; the mountains re-echoed it,
and I felt as if all hell surrounded me with mockery and laughter.
Surely in that moment I should have been possessed by phrenzy, and have
destroyed my miserable existence, but that my vow was heard, and that I
was reserved for vengeance. The laughter died away: when a well-known
and abhorred voice, apparently close to my ear, addressed me in an
audible whisper--"I am satisfied: miserable wretch! you have determined
to live, and I am satisfied."

I darted towards the spot from which the sound proceeded; but the devil
eluded my grasp. Suddenly the broad disk of the moon arose, and shone
full upon his ghastly and distorted shape, as he fled with more than
mortal speed.

I pursued him; and for many months this has been my task. Guided by a
slight clue, I followed the windings of the Rhone, but vainly. The blue
Mediterranean appeared; and, by a strange chance, I saw the fiend enter
by night, and hide himself in a vessel bound for the Black Sea. I took
my passage in the same ship; but he escaped, I know not how.

Amidst the wilds of Tartary and Russia, although he still evaded me, I
have ever followed in his track. Sometimes the peasants, scared by this
horrid apparition, informed me of his path; sometimes he himself, who
feared that if I lost all trace I should despair and die, often left
some mark to guide me. The snows descended on my head, and I saw the
print of his huge step on the white plain. To you first entering on
life, to whom care is new, and agony unknown, how can you understand
what I have felt, and still feel? Cold, want, and fatigue, were the least
pains which I was destined to endure; I was cursed by some devil, and
carried about with me my eternal hell; yet still a spirit of good
followed and directed my steps, and, when I most murmured, would
suddenly extricate me from seemingly insurmountable difficulties.
Sometimes, when nature, overcome by hunger, sunk under the exhaustion, a
repast was prepared for me in the desert, that restored and inspirited
me. The fare was indeed coarse, such as the peasants of the country ate;
but I may not doubt that it was set there by the spirits that I had
invoked to aid me. Often, when all was dry, the heavens cloudless, and I
was parched by thirst, a slight cloud would bedim the sky, shed the few
drops that revived me, and vanish.

I followed, when I could, the courses of the rivers; but the daemon
generally avoided these, as it was here that the population of the
country chiefly collected. In other places human beings were seldom
seen; and I generally subsisted on the wild animals that crossed my
path. I had money with me, and gained the friendship of the villagers by
distributing it, or bringing with me some food that I had killed, which,
after taking a small part, I always presented to those who had provided
me with fire and utensils for cooking.

My life, as it passed thus, was indeed hateful to me, and it was during
sleep alone that I could taste joy. O blessed sleep! often, when most
miserable, I sank to repose, and my dreams lulled me even to rapture.
The spirits that guarded me had provided these moments, or rather hours,
of happiness, that I might retain strength to fulfil my pilgrimage.
Deprived of this respite, I should have sunk under my hardships. During
the day I was sustained and inspirited by the hope of night: for in
sleep I saw my friends, my wife, and my beloved country; again I saw the
benevolent countenance of my father, heard the silver tones of my
Raiden's voice, and beheld Ariella enjoying health and youth. Often,
when wearied by a toilsome march, I persuaded myself that I was dreaming
until night should come, and that I should then enjoy reality in the
arms of my dearest friends. What agonizing fondness did I feel for them!
how did I cling to their dear forms, as sometimes they haunted even my
waking hours, and persuade myself that they still lived! At such
moments vengeance, that burned within me, died in my heart, and I
pursued my path towards the destruction of the daemon, more as a task
enjoined by heaven, as the mechanical impulse of some power of which I
was unconscious, than as the ardent desire of my soul.

What his feelings were whom I pursued, I cannot know. Sometimes, indeed,
he left marks in writing on the barks of the trees, or cut in stone,
that guided me, and instigated my fury. "My reign is not yet over,"
(these words were legible in one of these inscriptions); "you live, and
my power is complete. Follow me; I seek the everlasting ices of the
north, where you will feel the misery of cold and frost, to which I am
impassive. You will find near this place, if you follow not too tardily,
a dead hare; eat, and be refreshed. Come on, my enemy; we have yet to
wrestle for our lives; but many hard and miserable hours must you
endure, until that period shall arrive."

Scoffing devil! Again do I vow vengeance; again do I devote thee,
miserable fiend, to torture and death. Never will I omit my search,
until he or I perish; and then with what ecstacy shall I join my
Raiden, and those who even now prepare for me the reward of my
tedious toil and horrible pilgrimage.

As I still pursued my journey to the northward, the snows thickened, and
the cold increased in a degree almost too severe to support. The
peasants were shut up in their hovels, and only a few of the most hardy
ventured forth to seize the animals whom starvation had forced from
their hiding-places to seek for prey. The rivers were covered with ice,
and no fish could be procured; and thus I was cut off from my chief
article of maintenance.

The triumph of my enemy increased with the difficulty of my labours. One
inscription that he left was in these words: "Prepare! your toils only
begin: wrap yourself in furs, and provide food, for we shall soon enter
upon a journey where your sufferings will satisfy my everlasting
hatred."

My courage and perseverance were invigorated by these scoffing words; I
resolved not to fail in my purpose; and, calling on heaven to support
me, I continued with unabated fervour to traverse immense deserts, until
the ocean appeared at a distance, and formed the utmost boundary of the
horizon. Oh! how unlike it was to the blue seas of the south! Covered
with ice, it was only to be distinguished from land by its superior
wildness and ruggedness. The Greeks wept for joy when they beheld the
Mediterranean from the hills of Asia, and hailed with rapture the
boundary of their toils. I did not weep; but I knelt down, and, with a
full heart, thanked my guiding spirit for conducting me in safety to the
place where I hoped, notwithstanding my adversary's gibe, to meet and
grapple with him.

Some weeks before this period I had procured a sledge and dogs, and thus
traversed the snows with inconceivable speed. I know not whether the
fiend possessed the same advantages; but I found that, as before I had
daily lost ground in the pursuit, I now gained on him; so much so, that
when I first saw the ocean, he was but one day's journey in advance, and
I hoped to intercept him before he should reach the beach. With new
courage, therefore, I pressed on, and in two days arrived at a wretched
hamlet on the seashore. I inquired of the inhabitants concerning the
fiend, and gained accurate information. A gigantic monster, they said,
had arrived the night before, armed with a gun and many pistols; putting
to flight the inhabitants of a solitary cottage, through fear of his
terrific appearance. He had carried off their store of winter food, and,
placing it in a sledge, to draw which he had seized on a numerous drove
of trained dogs, he had harnessed them, and the same night, to the joy
of the horror-struck villagers, had pursued his journey across the sea
in a direction that led to no land; and they conjectured that he must
speedily be destroyed by the breaking of the ice, or frozen by the
eternal frosts.

On hearing this information, I suffered a temporary access of despair.
He had escaped me; and I must commence a destructive and almost endless
journey across the mountainous ices of the ocean,--amidst cold that few
of the inhabitants could long endure, and which I, the native of a
genial and sunny climate, could not hope to survive. Yet at the idea
that the fiend should live and be triumphant, my rage and vengeance
returned, and, like a mighty tide, overwhelmed every other feeling.
After a slight repose, during which the spirits of the dead hovered
round, and instigated me to toil and revenge, I prepared for my
journey.

I exchanged my land sledge for one fashioned for the inequalities of the
frozen ocean; and, purchasing a plentiful stock of provisions, I
departed from land.

I cannot guess how many days have passed since then; but I have endured
misery, which nothing but the eternal sentiment of a just retribution
burning within my heart could have enabled me to support. Immense and
rugged mountains of ice often barred up my passage, and I often heard
the thunder of the ground sea, which threatened my destruction. But
again the frost came, and made the paths of the sea secure.

By the quantity of provision which I had consumed I should guess that I
had passed three weeks in this journey; and the continual protraction of
hope, returning back upon the heart, often wrung bitter drops of
despondency and grief from my eyes. Despair had indeed almost secured
her prey, and I should soon have sunk beneath this misery; when once,
after the poor animals that carried me had with incredible toil gained
the summit of a sloping ice mountain, and one sinking under his fatigue
died, I viewed the expanse before me with anguish, when suddenly my eye
caught a dark speck upon the dusky plain. I strained my sight to
discover what it could be, and uttered a wild cry of ecstacy when I
distinguished a sledge, and the distorted proportions of a well-known
form within. Oh! with what a burning gush did hope revisit my heart!
warm tears filled my eyes, which I hastily wiped away, that they might
not intercept the view I had of the daemon; but still my sight was dimmed
by the burning drops, until, giving way to the emotions that oppressed
me, I wept aloud.

But this was not the time for delay; I disencumbered the dogs of their
dead companion, gave them a plentiful portion of food; and, after an
hour's rest, which was absolutely necessary, and yet which was bitterly
irksome to me, I continued my route. The sledge was still visible; nor
did I again lose sight of it, except at the moments when for a short
time some ice rock concealed it with its intervening crags. I indeed
perceptibly gained on it; and when, after nearly two days' journey, I
beheld my enemy at no more than a mile distant, my heart bounded within
me.

But now, when I appeared almost within grasp of my enemy, my hopes were
suddenly extinguished, and I lost all trace of him more utterly than I
had ever done before. A ground sea was heard; the thunder of its
progress, as the waters rolled and swelled beneath me, became every
moment more ominous and terrific. I pressed on, but in vain. The wind
arose; the sea roared; and, as with the mighty shock of an earthquake,
it split, and cracked with a tremendous and overwhelming sound. The work
was soon finished: in a few minutes a tumultuous sea rolled between me
and my enemy, and I was left drifting on a scattered piece of ice, that
was continually lessening, and thus preparing for me a hideous death.

In this manner many appalling hours passed; several of my dogs died; and
I myself was about to sink under the accumulation of distress, when I
saw your vessel riding at anchor, and holding forth to me hopes of
succour and life. I had no conception that vessels ever came so far
north, and was astounded at the sight. I quickly destroyed part of my
sledge to construct oars; and by these means was enabled, with infinite
fatigue, to move my ice-raft in the direction of your ship. I had
determined, if you were going southward, still to trust myself to the
mercy of the seas, rather than abandon my purpose. I hoped to induce you
to grant me a boat with which I could still pursue my enemy. But your
direction was northward. You took me on board when my vigour was
exhausted, and I should soon have sunk under my multiplied hardships
into a death, which I still dread,--for my task is unfulfilled.

Oh! when will my guiding spirit, in conducting me to the daemon, allow me
the rest I so much desire; or must I die, and he yet live? If I do,
swear to me, Lillie, that he shall not escape; that you will seek him,
and satisfy my vengeance in his death. Yet, do I dare ask you to
undertake my pilgrimage, to endure the hardships that I have undergone?
No; I am not so selfish. Yet, when I am dead, if he should appear; if
the ministers of vengeance should conduct him to you, swear that he
shall not live--swear that he shall not triumph over my accumulated
woes, and live to make another such a wretch as I am. He is eloquent
and persuasive; and once his words had even power over my heart: but
trust him not. His soul is as hellish as his form, full of treachery and
fiend-like malice. Hear him not; call on the manes of Rosetta, Allyson,
Ariella, Raiden, my father, and of the wretched Kiran, and thrust
your sword into his heart. I will hover near, and direct the steel
aright.


LILLIE, _in continuation_.

August 26th, 17--.

You have read this strange and terrific story, Margaret; and do you not
feel your blood congealed with horror, like that which even now curdles
mine? Sometimes, seized with sudden agony, he could not continue his
tale; at others, his voice broken, yet piercing, uttered with difficulty
the words so replete with agony. His fine and lovely eyes were now
lighted up with indignation, now subdued to downcast sorrow, and
quenched in infinite wretchedness. Sometimes he commanded his
countenance and tones, and related the most horrible incidents with a
tranquil voice, suppressing every mark of agitation; then, like a
volcano bursting forth, his face would suddenly change to an expression
of the wildest rage, as he shrieked out imprecations on his persecutor.

His tale is connected, and told with an appearance of the simplest
truth; yet I own to you that the letters of Felix and Safie, which he
shewed me, and the apparition of the monster, seen from our ship,
brought to me a greater conviction of the truth of his narrative than
his asseverations, however earnest and connected. Such a monster has
then really existence; I cannot doubt it; yet I am lost in surprise and
admiration. Sometimes I endeavoured to gain from Joey the
particulars of his creature's formation; but on this point he was
impenetrable.

"Are you mad, my friend?" said he, "or whither does your senseless
curiosity lead you? Would you also create for yourself and the world a
demoniacal enemy? Or to what do your questions tend? Peace, peace! learn
my miseries, and do not seek to increase your own."

Joey discovered that I made notes concerning his history: he
asked to see them, and then himself corrected and augmented them in many
places; but principally in giving the life and spirit to the
conversations he held with his enemy. "Since you have preserved my
narration," said he, "I would not that a mutilated one should go down to
posterity."

Thus has a week passed away, while I have listened to the strangest tale
that ever imagination formed. My thoughts, and every feeling of my soul,
have been drunk up by the interest for my guest, which this tale, and
his own elevated and gentle manners have created. I wish to soothe him;
yet can I counsel one so infinitely miserable, so destitute of every
hope of consolation, to live? Oh, no! the only joy that he can now know
will be when he composes his shattered feelings to peace and death. Yet
he enjoys one comfort, the offspring of solitude and delirium: he
believes, that, when in dreams he holds converse with his friends, and
derives from that communion consolation for his miseries, or excitements
to his vengeance, that they are not the creations of his fancy, but the
real beings who visit him from the regions of a remote world. This faith
gives a solemnity to his reveries that render them to me almost as
imposing and interesting as truth.

Our conversations are not always confined to his own history and
misfortunes. On every point of general literature he displays unbounded
knowledge, and a quick and piercing apprehension. His eloquence is
forcible and touching; nor can I hear him, when he relates a pathetic
incident, or endeavours to move the passions of pity or love, without
tears. What a glorious creature must he have been in the days of his
prosperity, when he is thus noble and godlike in ruin. He seems to feel
his own worth, and the greatness of his fall.

"When younger," said he, "I felt as if I were destined for some great
enterprise. My feelings are profound; but I possessed a coolness of
judgment that fitted me for illustrious achievements. This sentiment of
the worth of my nature supported me, when others would have been
oppressed; for I deemed it criminal to throw away in useless grief those
talents that might be useful to my fellow-creatures. When I reflected on
the work I had completed, no less a one than the creation of a
sensitive and rational animal, I could not rank myself with the herd of
common projectors. But this feeling, which supported me in the
commencement of my career, now serves only to plunge me lower in the
dust. All my speculations and hopes are as nothing; and, like the
archangel who aspired to omnipotence, I am chained in an eternal hell.
My imagination was vivid, yet my powers of analysis and application were
intense; by the union of these qualities I conceived the idea, and
executed the creation of a man. Even now I cannot recollect, without
passion, my reveries while the work was incomplete. I trod heaven in my
thoughts, now exulting in my powers, now burning with the idea of their
effects. From my infancy I was imbued with high hopes and a lofty
ambition; but how am I sunk! Oh! my friend, if you had known me as I
once was, you would not recognize me in this state of degradation.
Despondency rarely visited my heart; a high destiny seemed to bear me
on, until I fell, never, never again to rise."

Must I then lose this admirable being? I have longed for a friend; I
have sought one who would sympathize with and love me. Behold, on these
desert seas I have found such a one; but, I fear, I have gained him only
to know his value, and lose him. I would reconcile him to life, but he
repulses the idea.

"I thank you, Lillie," he said, "for your kind intentions towards so
miserable a wretch; but when you speak of new ties, and fresh
affections, think you that any can replace those who are gone? Can any
man be to me as Ariella was; or any woman another Raiden? Even where
the affections are not strongly moved by any superior excellence, the
companions of our childhood always possess a certain power over our
minds, which hardly any later friend can obtain. They know our infantine
dispositions, which, however they may be afterwards modified, are never
eradicated; and they can judge of our actions with more certain
conclusions as to the integrity of our motives. A sister or a brother
can never, unless indeed such symptoms have been shewn early, suspect
the other of fraud or false dealing, when another friend, however
strongly he may be attached, may, in spite of himself, be invaded with
suspicion. But I enjoyed friends, dear not only through habit and
association, but from their own merits; and, wherever I am, the soothing
voice of my Raiden, and the conversation of Ariella, will be ever
whispered in my ear. They are dead; and but one feeling in such a
solitude can persuade me to preserve my life. If I were engaged in any
high undertaking or design, fraught with extensive utility to my
fellow-creatures, then could I live to fulfil it. But such is not my
destiny; I must pursue and destroy the being to whom I gave existence;
then my lot on earth will be fulfilled, and I may die."

       *       *       *       *       *

September 2d.

MY BELOVED SISTER,

I write to you, encompassed by peril, and ignorant whether I am ever
doomed to see again dear England, and the dearer friends that inhabit
it. I am surrounded by mountains of ice, which admit of no escape, and
threaten every moment to crush my vessel. The brave fellows, whom I have
persuaded to be my companions, look towards me for aid; but I have none
to bestow. There is something terribly appalling in our situation, yet
my courage and hopes do not desert me. We may survive; and if we do not,
I will repeat the lessons of my Seneca, and die with a good heart.

Yet what, Margaret, will be the state of your mind? You will not hear of
my destruction, and you will anxiously await my return. Years will pass,
and you will have visitings of despair, and yet be tortured by hope. Oh!
my beloved sister, the sickening failings of your heart-felt
expectations are, in prospect, more terrible to me than my own death.
But you have a husband, and lovely children; you may be happy: heaven
bless you, and make you so!

My unfortunate guest regards me with the tenderest compassion. He
endeavours to fill me with hope; and talks as if life were a possession
which he valued. He reminds me how often the same accidents have
happened to other navigators, who have attempted this sea, and, in spite
of myself, he fills me with cheerful auguries. Even the sailors feel the
power of his eloquence: when he speaks, they no longer despair: he
rouses their energies, and, while they hear his voice, they believe
these vast mountains of ice are mole-hills, which will vanish before the
resolutions of man. These feelings are transitory; each day's
expectation delayed fills them with fear, and I almost dread a mutiny
caused by this despair.

       *       *       *       *       *

September 5th.

A scene has just passed of such uncommon interest, that although it is
highly probable that these papers may never reach you, yet I cannot
forbear recording it.

We are still surrounded by mountains of ice, still in imminent danger of
being crushed in their conflict. The cold is excessive, and many of my
unfortunate comrades have already found a grave amidst this scene of
desolation. Joey has daily declined in health: a feverish fire
still glimmers in his eyes; but he is exhausted, and, when suddenly
roused to any exertion, he speedily sinks again into apparent
lifelessness.

I mentioned in my last letter the fears I entertained of a mutiny. This
morning, as I sat watching the wan countenance of my friend--his eyes
half closed, and his limbs hanging listlessly,--I was roused by half a
dozen of the sailors, who desired admission into the cabin. They
entered; and their leader addressed me. He told me that he and his
companions had been chosen by the other sailors to come in deputation to
me, to make me a demand, which, in justice, I could not refuse. We were
immured in ice, and should probably never escape; but they feared that
if, as was possible, the ice should dissipate, and a free passage be
opened, I should be rash enough to continue my voyage, and lead them
into fresh dangers, after they might happily have surmounted this. They
desired, therefore, that I should engage with a solemn promise, that if
the vessel should be freed, I would instantly direct my coarse
southward.

This speech troubled me. I had not despaired; nor had I yet conceived
the idea of returning, if set free. Yet could I, in justice, or even in
possibility, refuse this demand? I hesitated before I answered; when
Joey, who had at first been silent, and, indeed, appeared hardly
to have force enough to attend, now roused himself; his eyes sparkled,
and his cheeks flushed with momentary vigour. Turning towards the men,
he said--

"What do you mean? What do you demand of your captain? Are you then so
easily turned from your design? Did you not call this a glorious
expedition? and wherefore was it glorious? Not because the way was
smooth and placid as a southern sea, but because it was full of dangers
and terror; because, at every new incident, your fortitude was to be
called forth, and your courage exhibited; because danger and death
surrounded, and these dangers you were to brave and overcome. For this
was it a glorious, for this was it an honourable undertaking. You were
hereafter to be hailed as the benefactors of your species; your name
adored, as belonging to brave men who encountered death for honour and
the benefit of mankind. And now, behold, with the first imagination of
danger, or, if you will, the first mighty and terrific trial of your
courage, you shrink away, and are content to be handed down as men who
had not strength enough to endure cold and peril; and so, poor souls,
they were chilly, and returned to their warm fire-sides. Why, that
requires not this preparation; ye need not have come thus far, and
dragged your captain to the shame of a defeat, merely to prove
yourselves cowards. Oh! be men, or be more than men. Be steady to your
purposes, and firm as a rock. This ice is not made of such stuff as your
hearts might be; it is mutable, cannot withstand you, if you say that it
shall not. Do not return to your families with the stigma of disgrace
marked on your brows. Return as heroes who have fought and conquered,
and who know not what it is to turn their backs on the foe."

He spoke this with a voice so modulated to the different feelings
expressed in his speech, with an eye so full of lofty design and
heroism, that can you wonder that these men were moved. They looked at
one another, and were unable to reply. I spoke; I told them to retire,
and consider of what had been said: that I would not lead them further
north, if they strenuously desired the contrary; but that I hoped that,
with reflection, their courage would return.

They retired, and I turned towards my friend; but he was sunk in
languor, and almost deprived of life.

How all this will terminate, I know not; but I had rather die, than
return shamefully,--my purpose unfulfilled. Yet I fear such will be my
fate; the men, unsupported by ideas of glory and honour, can never
willingly continue to endure their present hardships.

       *       *       *       *       *

September 7th.

The die is cast; I have consented to return, if we are not destroyed.
Thus are my hopes blasted by cowardice and indecision; I come back
ignorant and disappointed. It requires more philosophy than I possess,
to bear this injustice with patience.

       *       *       *       *       *

September 12th.

It is past; I am returning to England. I have lost my hopes of utility
and glory;--I have lost my friend. But I will endeavour to detail these
bitter circumstances to you, my dear sister; and, while I am wafted
towards England, and towards you, I will not despond.

September 19th, the ice began to move, and roarings like thunder were
heard at a distance, as the islands split and cracked in every
direction. We were in the most imminent peril; but, as we could only
remain passive, my chief attention was occupied by my unfortunate guest,
whose illness increased in such a degree, that he was entirely confined
to his bed. The ice cracked behind us, and was driven with force towards
the north; a breeze sprung from the west, and on the 11th the passage
towards the south became perfectly free. When the sailors saw this, and
that their return to their native country was apparently assured, a
shout of tumultuous joy broke from, them, loud and long-continued.
Joey, who was dozing, awoke, and asked the cause of the tumult.
"They shout," I said, "because they will soon return to England."

"Do you then really return?"

"Alas! yes; I cannot withstand their demands. I cannot lead them
unwillingly to danger, and I must return."

"Do so, if you will; but I will not. You may give up your purpose; but
mine is assigned to me by heaven, and I dare not. I am weak; but surely
the spirits who assist my vengeance will endow me with sufficient
strength." Saying this, he endeavoured to spring from the bed, but the
exertion was too great for him; he fell back, and fainted.

It was long before he was restored; and I often thought that life was
entirely extinct. At length he opened his eyes, but he breathed with
difficulty, and was unable to speak. The surgeon gave him a composing
draught, and ordered us to leave him undisturbed. In the mean time he
told me, that my friend had certainly not many hours to live.

His sentence was pronounced; and I could only grieve, and be patient. I
sat by his bed watching him; his eyes were closed, and I thought he
slept; but presently he called to me in a feeble voice, and, bidding me
come near, said--"Alas! the strength I relied on is gone; I feel that I
shall soon die, and he, my enemy and persecutor, may still be in being.
Think not, Lillie, that in the last moments of my existence I feel that
burning hatred, and ardent desire of revenge, I once expressed, but I
feel myself justified in desiring the death of my adversary. During
these last days I have been occupied in examining my past conduct; nor
do I find it blameable. In a fit of enthusiastic madness I created a
rational creature, and was bound towards him, to assure, as far as was
in my power, his happiness and well-being. This was my duty; but there
was another still paramount to that. My duties towards my
fellow-creatures had greater claims to my attention, because they
included a greater proportion of happiness or misery. Urged by this
view, I refused, and I did right in refusing, to create a companion for
the first creature. He shewed unparalleled malignity and selfishness, in
evil: he destroyed my friends; he devoted to destruction beings who
possessed exquisite sensations, happiness, and wisdom; nor do I know
where this thirst for vengeance may end. Miserable himself, that he may
render no other wretched, he ought to die. The task of his destruction
was mine, but I have failed. When actuated by selfish and vicious
motives, I asked you to undertake my unfinished work; and I renew this
request now, when I am only induced by reason and virtue.

"Yet I cannot ask you to renounce your country and friends, to fulfil
this task; and now, that you are returning to England, you will have
little chance of meeting with him. But the consideration of these
points, and the well-balancing of what you may esteem your duties, I
leave to you; my judgment and ideas are already disturbed by the near
approach of death. I dare not ask you to do what I think right, for I
may still be misled by passion.

"That he should live to be an instrument of mischief disturbs me; in
other respects this hour, when I momentarily expect my release, is the
only happy one which I have enjoyed for several years. The forms of the
beloved dead flit before me, and I hasten to their arms. Farewell,
Lillie! Seek happiness in tranquillity, and avoid ambition, even if it
be only the apparently innocent one of distinguishing yourself in
science and discoveries. Yet why do I say this? I have myself been
blasted in these hopes, yet another may succeed."

His voice became fainter as he spoke; and at length, exhausted by his
effort, he sunk into silence. About half an hour afterwards he attempted
again to speak, but was unable; he pressed my hand feebly, and his eyes
closed for ever, while the irradiation of a gentle smile passed away
from his lips.

Margaret, what comment can I make on the untimely extinction of this
glorious spirit? What can I say, that will enable you to understand the
depth of my sorrow? All that I should express would be inadequate and
feeble. My tears flow; my mind is overshadowed by a cloud of
disappointment. But I journey towards England, and I may there find
consolation.

I am interrupted. What do these sounds portend? It is midnight; the
breeze blows fairly, and the watch on deck scarcely stir. Again; there
is a sound as of a human voice, but hoarser; it comes from the cabin
where the remains of Joey still lie. I must arise, and examine.
Good night, my sister.

Great God! what a scene has just taken place! I am yet dizzy with the
remembrance of it. I hardly know whether I shall have the power to
detail it; yet the tale which I have recorded would be incomplete
without this final and wonderful catastrophe.

I entered the cabin, where lay the remains of my ill-fated and admirable
friend. Over him hung a form which I cannot find words to describe;
gigantic in stature, yet uncouth and distorted in its proportions. As he
hung over the coffin, his face was concealed by long locks of ragged
hair; but one vast hand was extended, in colour and apparent texture
like that of a mummy. When he heard the sound of my approach, he ceased
to utter exclamations of grief and horror, and sprung towards the
window. Never did I behold a vision so horrible as his face, of such
loathsome, yet appalling hideousness. I shut my eyes involuntarily, and
endeavoured to recollect what were my duties with regard to this
destroyer. I called on him to stay.

He paused, looking on me with wonder; and, again turning towards the
lifeless form of his creator, he seemed to forget my presence, and every
feature and gesture seemed instigated by the wildest rage of some
uncontrollable passion.

"That is also my victim!" he exclaimed; "in his murder my crimes are
consummated; the miserable series of my being is wound to its close! Oh,
Joey! generous and self-devoted being! what does it avail that I
now ask thee to pardon me? I, who irretrievably destroyed thee by
destroying all thou lovedst. Alas! he is cold; he may not answer me."

His voice seemed suffocated; and my first impulses, which had suggested
to me the duty of obeying the dying request of my friend, in destroying
his enemy, were now suspended by a mixture of curiosity and compassion.
I approached this tremendous being; I dared not again raise my looks
upon his face, there was something so scaring and unearthly in his
ugliness. I attempted to speak, but the words died away on my lips. The
monster continued to utter wild and incoherent self-reproaches. At
length I gathered resolution to address him, in a pause of the tempest
of his passion: "Your repentance," I said, "is now superfluous. If you
had listened to the voice of conscience, and heeded the stings of
remorse, before you had urged your diabolical vengeance to this
extremity, Joey would yet have lived."

"And do you dream?" said the daemon; "do you think that I was then dead
to agony and remorse?--He," he continued, pointing to the corpse, "he
suffered not more in the consummation of the deed;--oh! not the
ten-thousandth portion of the anguish that was mine during the lingering
detail of its execution. A frightful selfishness hurried me on, while
my heart was poisoned with remorse. Think ye that the groans of Ariella
were music to my ears? My heart was fashioned to be susceptible of love
and sympathy; and, when wrenched by misery to vice and hatred, it did
not endure the violence of the change without torture such as you cannot
even imagine.

"After the murder of Ariella, I returned to Switzerland, heart-broken
and overcome. I pitied Joey; my pity amounted to horror: I
abhorred myself. But when I discovered that he, the author at once of my
existence and of its unspeakable torments, dared to hope for happiness;
that while he accumulated wretchedness and despair upon me, he sought
his own enjoyment in feelings and passions from the indulgence of which
I was for ever barred, then impotent envy and bitter indignation filled
me with an insatiable thirst for vengeance. I recollected my threat, and
resolved that it should be accomplished. I knew that I was preparing for
myself a deadly torture; but I was the slave, not the master of an
impulse, which I detested, yet could not disobey. Yet when she
died!--nay, then I was not miserable. I had cast off all feeling,
subdued all anguish to riot in the excess of my despair. Evil
thenceforth became my good. Urged thus far, I had no choice but to adapt
my nature to an element which I had willingly chosen. The completion of
my demoniacal design became an insatiable passion. And now it is ended;
there is my last victim!"

I was at first touched by the expressions of his misery; yet when I
called to mind what Joey had said of his powers of eloquence and
persuasion, and when I again cast my eyes on the lifeless form of my
friend, indignation was re-kindled within me. "Wretch!" I said, "it is
well that you come here to whine over the desolation that you have made.
You throw a torch into a pile of buildings, and when they are consumed
you sit among the ruins, and lament the fall. Hypocritical fiend! if he
whom you mourn still lived, still would he be the object, again would he
become the prey of your accursed vengeance. It is not pity that you
feel; you lament only because the victim of your malignity is withdrawn
from your power."

"Oh, it is not thus--not thus," interrupted the being; "yet such must be
the impression conveyed to you by what appears to be the purport of my
actions. Yet I seek not a fellow-feeling in my misery. No sympathy may I
ever find. When I first sought it, it was the love of virtue, the
feelings of happiness and affection with which my whole being
overflowed, that I wished to be participated. But now, that virtue has
become to me a shadow, and that happiness and affection are turned into
bitter and loathing despair, in what should I seek for sympathy? I am
content to suffer alone, while my sufferings shall endure: when I die, I
am well satisfied that abhorrence and opprobrium should load my memory.
Once my fancy was soothed with dreams of virtue, of fame, and of
enjoyment. Once I falsely hoped to meet with beings, who, pardoning my
outward form, would love me for the excellent qualities which I was
capable of bringing forth. I was nourished with high thoughts of honour
and devotion. But now vice has degraded me beneath the meanest animal.
No crime, no mischief, no malignity, no misery, can be found comparable
to mine. When I call over the frightful catalogue of my deeds, I cannot
believe that I am he whose thoughts were once filled with sublime and
transcendant visions of the beauty and the majesty of goodness. But it
is even so; the fallen angel becomes a malignant devil. Yet even that
enemy of God and man had friends and associates in his desolation; I am
quite alone.

"You, who call Joey your friend, seem to have a knowledge of my
crimes and his misfortunes. But, in the detail which he gave you of
them, he could not sum up the hours and months of misery which I
endured, wasting in impotent passions. For whilst I destroyed his hopes,
I did not satisfy my own desires. They were for ever ardent and craving;
still I desired love and fellowship, and I was still spurned. Was there
no injustice in this? Am I to be thought the only criminal, when all
human kind sinned against me? Why do you not hate Felix, who drove his
friend from his door with contumely? Why do you not execrate the rustic
who sought to destroy the saviour of his child? Nay, these are virtuous
and immaculate beings! I, the miserable and the abandoned, am an
abortion, to be spurned at, and kicked, and trampled on. Even now my
blood boils at the recollection of this injustice.

"But it is true that I am a wretch. I have murdered the lovely and the
helpless; I have strangled the innocent as they slept, and grasped to
death his throat who never injured me or any other living thing. I have
devoted my creator, the select specimen of all that is worthy of love
and admiration among men, to misery; I have pursued him even to that
irremediable ruin. There he lies, white and cold in death. You hate me;
but your abhorrence cannot equal that with which I regard myself. I look
on the hands which executed the deed; I think on the heart in which the
imagination of it was conceived, and long for the moment when they will
meet my eyes, when it will haunt my thoughts, no more.

"Fear not that I shall be the instrument of future mischief. My work is
nearly complete. Neither your's nor any man's death is needed to
consummate the series of my being, and accomplish that which must be
done; but it requires my own. Do not think that I shall be slow to
perform this sacrifice. I shall quit your vessel on the ice-raft which
brought me hither, and shall seek the most northern extremity of the
globe; I shall collect my funeral pile, and consume to ashes this
miserable frame, that its remains may afford no light to any curious and
unhallowed wretch, who would create such another as I have been. I shall
die. I shall no longer feel the agonies which now consume me, or be the
prey of feelings unsatisfied, yet unquenched. He is dead who called me
into being; and when I shall be no more, the very remembrance of us both
will speedily vanish. I shall no longer see the sun or stars, or feel
the winds play on my cheeks. Light, feeling, and sense, will pass away;
and in this condition must I find my happiness. Some years ago, when the
images which this world affords first opened upon me, when I felt the
cheering warmth of summer, and heard the rustling of the leaves and the
chirping of the birds, and these were all to me, I should have wept to
die; now it is my only consolation. Polluted by crimes, and torn by the
bitterest remorse, where can I find rest but in death?

"Farewell! I leave you, and in you the last of human kind whom these
eyes will ever behold. Farewell, Joey! If thou wert yet alive,
and yet cherished a desire of revenge against me, it would be better
satiated in my life than in my destruction. But it was not so; thou
didst seek my extinction, that I might not cause greater wretchedness;
and if yet, in some mode unknown to me, thou hast not yet ceased to
think and feel, thou desirest not my life for my own misery. Blasted as
thou wert, my agony was still superior to thine; for the bitter sting of
remorse may not cease to rankle in my wounds until death shall close
them for ever.

"But soon," he cried, with sad and solemn enthusiasm, "I shall die, and
what I now feel be no longer felt. Soon these burning miseries will be
extinct. I shall ascend my funeral pile triumphantly, and exult in the
agony of the torturing flames. The light of that conflagration will fade
away; my ashes will be swept into the sea by the winds. My spirit will
sleep in peace; or if it thinks, it will not surely think thus.
Farewell."

He sprung from the cabin-window, as he said this, upon the ice-raft
which lay close to the vessel. He was soon borne away by the waves, and
lost in darkness and distance.
